[Amit Varma]: Here's a thought experiment I want you to think about and at the end of that
[Amit Varma]: experiment is a question. When I ask you that question I'd like you to pause this
[Amit Varma]: podcast for a moment and take a stab at answering it. Imagine that you meet your
[Amit Varma]: future self in a zoom call that somehow travels through time. You are allowed to
[Amit Varma]: ask this future version of you one question. How should I live my life? What
[Amit Varma]: answer does your future self give? That's my question to you. What advice does your
[Amit Varma]: future self give you when it comes to living your life? Pause and answer this
[Amit Varma]: for me. Well here's my answer. My future self tells me two words. Pay attention.
[Amit Varma]: When I think about the way I live my life that's one thing I don't do enough
[Amit Varma]: of. That's one thing all of us don't do enough of. We spend time living in the
[Amit Varma]: past or the future and not enough in the present and when we are in the present
[Amit Varma]: we are not paying attention. We are always distracted, always absent. Think
[Amit Varma]: about the modern marriage for example. What is the modern marriage? Two people
[Amit Varma]: side-by-side in their bed, lights off, their face illuminated by the blue glow
[Amit Varma]: from the screen in front of them. What is the modern family? Maybe together
[Amit Varma]: sometimes physically but always alone together. You sit with your loved ones
[Amit Varma]: and stare into your phone. You sit at a cafe and never once look around you. You
[Amit Varma]: find yourself in a beautiful place and you take pictures one after another, even
[Amit Varma]: high-definition video so that you don't lose a moment and in doing so you don't
[Amit Varma]: even get to live the moment. One thing I'd like to do more of in the time that
[Amit Varma]: I have left is be present in the moment. Pay attention. Pay attention to all the
[Amit Varma]: sensations around me. Pay attention to the people around me who might not be
[Amit Varma]: there tomorrow when it will be too late and one of the things I should pay
[Amit Varma]: attention to is my own body. What is it telling me? What am I doing wrong? And
[Amit Varma]: also what food am I putting into it? I mean this is my body. The soul only
[Amit Varma]: exists as a metaphor. My body is all of me. So what I put into it should be a big
[Amit Varma]: big deal. Is it a big deal for you? How deeply have you thought about the food
[Amit Varma]: that you eat?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and
[Unknown]: behavioral science. Please welcome your host Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. My guest today is Nandita Iyer, famous food
[Amit Varma]: writer and author of the wonderful new book Everyday Superfoods. Nandita is a
[Amit Varma]: medical doctor who was an early food blogger and then took her passion for
[Amit Varma]: food and writing into Instagram, YouTube and columns and books. Her writing about
[Amit Varma]: food has both conceptual clarity and practical utility and in this
[Amit Varma]: conversation we shoot the breeze about a lot more than that. Like all the rest of
[Amit Varma]: us Nandita contains multitudes and this episode reveals aspects of her that will
[Amit Varma]: be shocking to many including how her friends once cut open a human skull while
[Amit Varma]: singing happy birthday to her. And also we have a bit of music at the start of
[Amit Varma]: the conversation so if you listen to this podcast at a higher speed as you
[Amit Varma]: should you might need to come to 1x just for that. But first let's take a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break. These days I have taken to preaching the virtues of mindfulness
[Amit Varma]: and there is nothing we should be more mindful of than human behavior. One of
[Amit Varma]: the great books I have read in recent times is Behave by Robert Sapolsky and
[Amit Varma]: many of his incredible insights are now available to you for free. Head on over
[Amit Varma]: to the sponsors of this episode The Great Courses Plus at TheGreatCoursesPlus.com
[Amit Varma]: and check out a course taught by Sapolsky called Biology and Human
[Amit Varma]: Behavior the Neurological Origins of Individuality. In 24 riveting online
[Amit Varma]: lectures Sapolsky takes us through the neurology of the brain, how hormones can
[Amit Varma]: shape us, how behavior evolved, the role of genes, what studying animals tells us
[Amit Varma]: about ourselves and so on. Sapolsky is one of the great thinkers of our times
[Amit Varma]: and this is just one of the many great courses on this aptly named site. The
[Amit Varma]: Great Courses Plus has a fantastic library of online courses from subjects
[Amit Varma]: ranging from music, math, cooking, history, political theory and much else. They also
[Amit Varma]: have an app where you can listen to the audio of these courses the same way you
[Amit Varma]: are listening to this podcast now and it will cost you nothing. You get one month
[Amit Varma]: of unlimited free access if you use the following URL TheGreatCoursesPlus.com
[Amit Varma]: slash unseen that's right unseen TheGreatCoursesPlus.com slash unseen for
[Amit Varma]: one month of unlimited free access. Sign up now.
[Guest]: Nandita welcome to the seen and the unseen. Thank you Amit. Having been a
[Guest]: listener for quite some time it's absolute pleasure and honor to be on your
[Amit Varma]: show. Thank you. Now having read you for so many years it's an honor to have you
[Amit Varma]: on and absolutely about time even if it is on the occasion of this wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book you've written everyday superfoods you know you should have been on earlier
[Amit Varma]: in the past but I'm going to kind of start this with an unusual request
[Amit Varma]: because I have just discovered as recently as yesterday that you sing as
[Amit Varma]: well that you're studying Hindustani classical music so why don't you sing a
[Amit Varma]: little bit of some song that counts as your comfort song that in difficult
[Guest]: times some songs that brings you peace. Well that would be great and I'm happy I
[Guest]: think I'll be the first person to be singing on your show so I'm very happy
[Guest]: to be doing that. Just a second I'll start my taanpura in the background so
[Amit Varma]: I know what scale to sing at. Sure sure.
[Guest]: I'm just going to sing a couple of lines from a bandish that I'm learning
[Guest]: currently in Raag Yaman and Raag Yaman is like the most primary raag that people
[Guest]: start learning when they learn Hindustani classical music but it's also
[Guest]: like it's nothing primary that it's extremely deep and people can actually
[Guest]: learn it for a decade and still not have learnt enough so that's a little bit
[Unknown]: about the raag.
[Unknown]: Unahi ke sangva aali di
[Unknown]: Neha kaise laga ho mora re
[Unknown]: Bhavara samana bhatkata tha
[Unknown]: Mana moraab toh neet hi
[Unknown]: Unahi ke daras anuraga Neha kaise laga ho mora re
[Amit Varma]: Yeah that was lovely. I mean I don't really understand Hindustani classical
[Amit Varma]: music but that was so soothing and you know maybe at the end of the episode if
[Amit Varma]: you have the energy we'll do a bit of that. My mom was a Hindustani classical
[Amit Varma]: musician by the way and she died I think but 12 and a half years ago so to say
[Amit Varma]: and it's very interesting I was I was kind of reading through your book and
[Amit Varma]: your food memories and all of that and I was thinking how you know at different
[Amit Varma]: parts of your life the kind of food that you eat or the things that you drink are
[Amit Varma]: so connected to memories that you have you know so I could you know when I
[Amit Varma]: think of what is sort of my comfort food my mind immediately goes back to a
[Amit Varma]: few things my mother used to cook in my childhood in the 1980s you know one of
[Amit Varma]: her delicacies being something called fishala keev and I've never quite had
[Amit Varma]: fishala keev like that anywhere else but that of course is how it is food is so
[Amit Varma]: imbued with memories and one of the things I kind of liked about your
[Amit Varma]: writing is a recognition of the personal that your food writing isn't dry it is
[Amit Varma]: not like these are the recipes and these are the ingredients and this has vitamins
[Amit Varma]: and this has that and this is how you make it together but you know so much of
[Amit Varma]: your writing is also interspersed with the personal that which is quite
[Amit Varma]: charming but so I I will you know I of course do begin all my shows with the
[Amit Varma]: personal but there's all the more reason to do so here as well so take me back to
[Amit Varma]: your childhood which is of course you know in the city where I have lived in
[Amit Varma]: for more than a couple of decades tell me about you know growing up in Bombay
[Amit Varma]: what that was like early memories of food if there are early memories of food
[Amit Varma]: because I I don't want to commit the danger of you know just because you are
[Amit Varma]: such a prominent food writer and all that of just associating you with food
[Amit Varma]: ask everything about food I don't want to do that people contain multitudes as
[Amit Varma]: I like saying on the show to tell me about your childhood how was it growing
[Guest]: up in Bombay what was your family like so I was a 70s kid and I was born in
[Guest]: Bombay like you said and my three generations like right from my great
[Guest]: grandparents who had moved to Bombay in 1930s early 1930s and then of course my
[Guest]: grandparents and my parents and then me so I'm like a though I'm Tamil but I'm
[Guest]: fourth generation Mumbiker and yeah so I was the first in my generation both from
[Guest]: my paternal side and the maternal side so both my parents being the eldest kids
[Guest]: I was the first in my generation while you know I was pampered a lot and like
[Guest]: of course like the first child in any like a generation is always most
[Guest]: welcomed and it's the novelty like people are literally looking at diapers
[Guest]: after 20 years you know so I also I was living with my grandparents my three
[Guest]: maternal aunts and while my mom and dad were in the same city they both were
[Guest]: working so I was brought up by my grandparents and my aunts essentially
[Guest]: and my mom used to come over on weekends etc and we had this kind of different
[Guest]: arrangement for those days because it was not very common but and I would have
[Guest]: a tough time explaining to friends like where is your mother how how do you have
[Guest]: five mothers like you know three aunts one mom and one grandmom strong feminine
[Guest]: influence around me and like where are your parents they hardly come for any
[Guest]: school days so that that was my childhood and I think over a period of
[Guest]: time I got used to answering those questions and dealing with that my my
[Guest]: life is different from other kids who live in these nuclear families just
[Guest]: parents and kids or a sibling and my sister is 10 years younger to me so for
[Guest]: the longest time I was a single child all through my you know childhood and
[Guest]: that I think that also played a big role in shaping who I am today because one
[Guest]: growing up with grandparents there is that kind of undeniable generation gap
[Guest]: where you want to do something and you know you are a bit wired then they don't
[Guest]: want they have very strict rules also being this you know Tamil family but
[Guest]: although even Bombay I think I had a more conservative upbringing than people
[Guest]: stories I hear about in tier 2 and tier 3 cities I think even their parents were
[Guest]: like a little more aspirational thing yeah be modern wear jeans you know have
[Guest]: boyfriends and stuff which it was never the case in my house is very strict so
[Guest]: going back to actually I want to go back to my great-grandparents moving to
[Guest]: Bombay because that's the story I really like and you know I find it interesting
[Guest]: how did you guys just suddenly pack up and come here from you know Tamil Nadu
[Guest]: and I had the privilege of having my great-grandmother in my life even when
[Guest]: my son was born so she's she lived to 85 86 so we actually have a five generation
[Guest]: picture of my great-grandmother my grandmother my mother me and my son so
[Guest]: I was telling my son if you were a daughter we would we would have been
[Guest]: five generations of women together but yeah it's okay I'll be I won't complain
[Guest]: yeah so my great-grandparents my great-grandfather moved to Bombay first
[Guest]: to look for prospects and all he already had three daughters by then in in a
[Guest]: small town in Tamil Nadu and he came to Bombay because also he knew that a lot
[Guest]: of people had migrated from there so he stayed with a cousin who lived near
[Guest]: Ruia college somewhere he stayed like for a couple of months and he had
[Guest]: actually done MA in English and history so there was no way that he would find a
[Guest]: job of any you know relevance in the small town in Tamil Nadu and he said okay
[Guest]: this is a good place for me to find look I'm looking for a job I have three
[Guest]: daughters to support and I need to do something with my life so he stayed in
[Guest]: this cousin's place for a month or two and then he got a job with Western
[Guest]: Railways and then the best option to find a place was Matunga or King Circle
[Guest]: because there was already the set community the people speaking your
[Guest]: language you know the vegetable vendors selling your kind of subzis, temples so
[Guest]: like that whole ecosystem was kind of set up for someone migrating to such a
[Guest]: big city even in 1930s like Bombay was the kind of an intimidating city for
[Guest]: someone who's never been outside their village before so they found this small
[Guest]: apartment in King Circle and you know I often ask my mom and aunts about these
[Guest]: stories so they said that in those days this two rent board would be hanging
[Guest]: from the trees and outside the buildings and the rent was it was 1930s and the
[Guest]: rent was around five rupees a month and my great-grandfather's salary in those
[Guest]: days was around 30 rupees and he had like three and he had three children to
[Guest]: support and pay the house rent and the school fees and everything right so the
[Guest]: funny thing was that anytime that two rent board changed into like someone
[Guest]: offering even like a four rupee fifty paisa people would just pick up their
[Guest]: stuff and move to the next possible house because there were hardly any
[Guest]: furniture in those days hardly any possessions except for your cooking
[Guest]: utensils two three pairs of clothes and a sack of coal which was your supply to
[Guest]: run the kitchen for the month and that was all and my mom and my aunts tell me
[Guest]: that this was the situation in most families but surprisingly these guys
[Guest]: never moved they stayed in the same apartment for over 50 years and even I
[Guest]: have been there and I have stayed there with them and I have good memories of
[Guest]: that place and I even after they moved out of that place I used to go back and
[Guest]: hang around there just you know for the kicks of nostalgia and getting all
[Guest]: sentimental about the place where my family first came into Bombay so I asked
[Guest]: my mom other than the cultural reason why Matunga and King Circle so she said
[Guest]: in those days that was the cheaper kind of available option given the salary
[Guest]: that Tata was earning and also that you know having a self-contained house with
[Guest]: a bathroom inside the house was also a very big deal in those days and those
[Guest]: houses were quite expensive to rent and this given that it was only five rupees
[Guest]: a month it was five rupees a month not only but it was still a good amount for
[Guest]: having a bathroom in the house when you have three daughters and you have a
[Guest]: bigger family you don't want to risk you know not having a bathroom in the house
[Guest]: so that was the other reason and I found it like wow I mean you know it fills me
[Guest]: with the kind of feeling that I can't really explain how things were at that
[Guest]: time and because I've lived so much with my grandparents I used to hear a lot of
[Guest]: stories from them about their times in early Bombay the one thing that I know
[Guest]: firsthand is that my mother's cousin brother who's also my great-grandparents
[Guest]: grandson he would often tell my great-grandparents that you guys you
[Guest]: have lived in Matunga like for 50 years but you would never learn proper Hindi
[Guest]: or Marathi and all the Sabzi Walas have learned Tamil and they call you when you
[Guest]: go buying vegetables that you know they will name all the vegetables in Tamil
[Guest]: saying Amma you're not taking this vegetable today so that was like the
[Guest]: standing joke in our family that how much of the Tamil culture they infused
[Guest]: into the UP people the Bihar people the Gujaratis like everybody just became a
[Guest]: part of that Tamil culture going to temples and everything just became part
[Guest]: of their DNA purely because it was such a cultural hub of Tamilians in Bombay so
[Guest]: that's about my great-grandparents and then my grandfather had a government job
[Guest]: and with the central government and so I was born in the house where he had a
[Guest]: quarters in Napien Sea Road and it was this big beautiful house facing the
[Guest]: Arabian Sea and those days the Priyadarshani Park had not yet come up it
[Guest]: came up just when we left that house so it was this unobstructed view of the
[Guest]: sea and I was so spoilt I would say what is this every day I wake up I only see
[Guest]: the sea view I mean little did I know that you know I would kill for such a
[Guest]: view later on in my life but talk about having something at your disposal every
[Guest]: day and you don't have the value for that at all like especially in the
[Guest]: monsoons the you couldn't even open the balcony door because the winds would
[Guest]: come howling inside and push the door back so those are the memories I have of
[Guest]: growing up in Napien Sea Road and I didn't know that this was literally the
[Guest]: creme de la creme area to live in Bombay for me yeah it was just a house and it
[Guest]: was just a place in Bombay I had no idea about the suburbs and you know the
[Guest]: different hierarchies it was fun it was like this huge quarters government
[Guest]: quarters lots of families of you know different languages religions it was
[Guest]: like a melting pot and it was no longer just like a Tamil hub there was this
[Guest]: temple and lots of friends to play with so that that that was the first ten
[Guest]: years of my life and I attended school somewhere there near Chowpatty I was
[Guest]: always like quite a studious kid also because I didn't I was not a very
[Guest]: outdoorsy kid and I was not the one to be playing out all the time so my mostly
[Guest]: I would be studying reading or learning music or mostly indoor kind of things to
[Guest]: do and so then I would without much effort I would be in the top one two
[Guest]: three ranks in school I don't think anybody ever bothered about it in my
[Guest]: house they said yeah okay your exams you're studying and because my mom would
[Guest]: sometimes come on the weekends before my exam to coach me on some asking do some
[Guest]: mock test and all with me because they said what is this girl doing nobody
[Guest]: knows whether she's studying or not studying so just to keep a little bit of
[Guest]: a watch on me and we would do these things I don't know am I supposed to go
[Amit Varma]: on and on yeah no I'll ask you a lot more because yeah all this is so
[Amit Varma]: fascinating to me and I was I was actually you know I live in Andheri so I
[Amit Varma]: was thinking yeah okay humble beginnings in Matunga but suddenly you said
[Amit Varma]: Napiency Road and Napiency Road is so posh by the way for people who don't
[Amit Varma]: know Bombay that I've never even been there in more than 20 years because I
[Amit Varma]: don't have posh friends it is super posh I was I was struck by you know I'm
[Amit Varma]: really glad that you spoke about your great-grandparents because one of the
[Amit Varma]: things that sort of struck me and it's something that I was I've been kind of
[Amit Varma]: thinking about recently because I have to move house soon as soon as the
[Amit Varma]: lockdown gets over and the situation gets better and I'm just thinking of all
[Amit Varma]: the things we have to shift and how many of them seem to be you know needless
[Amit Varma]: just things that you accumulate over the sort of the decades and and you know the
[Amit Varma]: thousands of books even feel like extremely out of place because you know
[Amit Varma]: I do most of my reading on the Kindle or on the laptop and all of that it's very
[Amit Varma]: striking and something that we may not think about or take for granted that the
[Amit Varma]: things you mentioned that they used to shift with were you know you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: cooking utensils first so you have your cooking utensils and then whatever
[Amit Varma]: clothes you have and that's pretty much it while today you know in our modern
[Amit Varma]: worlds we love so much furniture so much electronics so many books so many curios
[Amit Varma]: and artifacts and all of that and and yet at a time cooking utensils are so
[Amit Varma]: fundamental like I remember I did an episode with Anshul Malhotra on
[Amit Varma]: partition where she's done this beautiful book on objects that people
[Amit Varma]: bring with them from partition and in many cases ever utensils because when
[Amit Varma]: people ran away from home that was the one thing they took with them partly for
[Amit Varma]: practical reasons of course because you know you may have to cook your own food
[Amit Varma]: while you're on the road and it's good to have something to cook it in because
[Amit Varma]: you know obviously you can't take some dal in your palm and hold that over the
[Amit Varma]: fire but did food and cooking was it ever something that ever interested you
[Amit Varma]: did you have to learn to cook when you were a kid especially when you were in a
[Amit Varma]: joint family with five mothers so to say three aunts one grandmom one mom was the
[Amit Varma]: kitchen a different kind of space like today you know in our experience of say
[Amit Varma]: nuclear households the kitchen isn't such a big deal but I can imagine that
[Amit Varma]: in a large joint family the kitchen would have played a different kind of
[Amit Varma]: role where almost a community space as it were do you have memories of any of
[Amit Varma]: that or is food just something that you know you ate absentmindedly while
[Guest]: growing up and didn't really think about yeah it's a very good question and you
[Guest]: know I get asked this quite a bit because people want to know if I was
[Guest]: always into cooking and did I start early see because having so many women
[Guest]: in the house and like I said I was the first child in my generation I was not
[Guest]: expected to enter the kitchen at all in fact if I even entered the kitchen I
[Guest]: would be shooed away saying go read go practice music or do something do
[Guest]: something worthwhile don't waste your time in the kitchen that was what was
[Guest]: told to me and despite the fact that like I said they were very traditional
[Guest]: and conservative but I think it's something about this being in a Bombay a
[Guest]: very aspirational city that there was the subtle thing that you had to do
[Guest]: something great in your life you know no matter what so you need to focus on
[Guest]: building those skills and that though I never was overtly a pressure to do
[Guest]: anything like nobody ever scolded me if I didn't get first rank but I did have
[Guest]: that pressure on myself since I was very young I don't know beat something like a
[Guest]: competitive spirit or if I do something I want to excel at it I don't want to be
[Guest]: in the middle like if I put an effort I need to see some good results for that
[Guest]: so yeah so I never I hardly ever entered the kitchen and like even my
[Guest]: grandfather I even remember as late as you know in before 12th standard I was
[Guest]: attending these classes in Dadar Agarwal classes to study maths and physics and
[Guest]: stuff to you know get good marks in the 12th science exams and those days we
[Guest]: were living in Mulund and I just take the local train leave home at around 5
[Guest]: 30 a.m. so I could reach the class at 7 o'clock when it started in the morning
[Guest]: and my grandfather would wake up at 5 and he would like standard two slices of
[Guest]: bread with jam and butter a glass of milk or whatever it would be there for
[Guest]: me ready when I got up at 5, gulp it down so 5.30 like get ready and 5.30 out
[Guest]: of the house and he would take me to the bus stop and then I would take the train
[Guest]: etc so there was nowhere expected that I had to do this on my own like even my
[Guest]: grandfather would do these things for me their priorities were very clear you
[Guest]: have to study well and you have to do something good with your life and also
[Guest]: for them it was like a kitchen was like what are you going to do in the kitchen
[Guest]: how is it going to help your life in any way and maybe later on when you're
[Guest]: independent anyway you'll have to be wasting your time here so might as well
[Guest]: don't do it now when there are so many of us to handle and in my family also
[Guest]: because they were so traditional they were very exacting requirements of how
[Guest]: everything has to be made so there was no place for a person like me with no
[Guest]: real knowledge about what exactly is going into anything and if I come they
[Guest]: think I'm only going to mess up something so that was the other reason I
[Guest]: was not allowed and like they were so super careful every time they were
[Guest]: making these like say Diwali sweets or some festival things they would keep the
[Guest]: gas on the floor and my grandmother would sit on the floor and make all
[Guest]: these things because it's it's tough to keep standing for like two and three
[Guest]: hours and you know do it on the standing counter so when that used to happen when
[Guest]: I was a much younger child you literally draw like a Lakshman Rekha outside the
[Guest]: kitchen and say you're not supposed to cross this and I would have all these
[Guest]: insane super aromas coming to me and I could not even cross the line and go
[Guest]: into the kitchen because they were worried that there's this whole plan of
[Guest]: boiling oil and you know they wouldn't trust me to be safe around that so those
[Guest]: are the things that I remember and the other very fond memories like these
[Guest]: Diwali times when my aunts even much later on my grandmother they would all
[Guest]: sit on the floor you know that was like a very unique and a fun situation
[Guest]: because usually that cooking was so mechanical and you know one person
[Guest]: standing on the counter and finishing off the things but this seemed like such
[Guest]: a community fun exercise they'll be gossiping about something or the other
[Guest]: and I would feel like I'm missing out on all the fun because I'm not even
[Guest]: allowed to go inside so I grew up not knowing much about cooking at all and I
[Guest]: think when I was 10 or something I learned to make a dosa from my
[Guest]: grandmother like standing on the stool and you know learning how it's made
[Guest]: that's because I kind of liked that process and it felt a bit like a craft
[Guest]: fun kind of project to do so that's one thing I learned I knew to make tea and
[Guest]: that's about it I knew nothing else growing up I just went to college with
[Amit Varma]: only this much knowledge about cooking yeah and no one of the things that you
[Amit Varma]: that you said that struck me and I'm just thinking aloud here is that
[Amit Varma]: perhaps you were given this push because you were in Bombay and it was this
[Amit Varma]: feeling of that hey we are in Bombay it's an opportunity so don't let it go
[Amit Varma]: to waste and you know which might not have been the case in a smaller town and
[Amit Varma]: I think as an extension of that I wonder if one could then say that a lot of
[Amit Varma]: parents who themselves have come up the hard way who were to fight for
[Amit Varma]: everything who perhaps just because of the times but perhaps because they've
[Amit Varma]: actually moved their way up that because they've had to fight all the way and and
[Amit Varma]: now they can you know offer the kid more opportunities they pressurize the kid so
[Amit Varma]: much because they feel that it's now almost obligatory to make use of the
[Amit Varma]: opportunities that they never had and I wonder if there's something similar at
[Amit Varma]: play so tell me something in these years growing up as you were where you are
[Amit Varma]: both you know in a traditional family where in a sense you're rooted but also
[Amit Varma]: you're driven you're ambitious you're doing things you're going to Agarwal's
[Amit Varma]: classes and all of that and you're a science kid and a good student neither
[Amit Varma]: of which I ever was so what what's your conception of yourself at this time like
[Amit Varma]: you did go on to become a medical doctor and we'll chat about that more but at
[Amit Varma]: this point in time as you're growing up in your through your childhood and
[Amit Varma]: through your teens and as you're getting to college what's your conception of
[Amit Varma]: yourself do you have fantasies about what you will do later on in life are
[Amit Varma]: there anything you could call either ambitions or dreams or are you just kind
[Amit Varma]: of going with the flow and just trying to excel in whatever is immediately in
[Amit Varma]: front of you which could be the exams or Agarwal's classes or whatever this is
[Guest]: such a question that it's really making me introspect I have never thought about
[Guest]: this myself to be honest and I knew coming as a guest on your podcast is
[Guest]: going to make me think a lot about myself and discover some things which I
[Guest]: had not really given a thought to earlier you know when I was born I was
[Guest]: born in that Napiency Road house like I told you our neighbors their eldest
[Guest]: daughter was a was an IAS officer and on the 11th day or 12th day they have this
[Guest]: cradle ceremony for the baby and in my house because I was the first kid there
[Guest]: was no earlier cradles in the house to put me in so they borrowed this cradle
[Guest]: from the next-door neighbor that belonged to the lady who was already
[Guest]: grown up by then she was the IAS officer and already in those days so they were
[Guest]: all saying she are going to become an IAS officer that was like something that
[Guest]: was driven to me I didn't even know what was IAS officer but I clearly remember
[Guest]: that term from very early on in childhood like maybe when I was 3 or 4
[Guest]: I knew that there's something like this IAS officer and my folks want me to
[Guest]: become that so that was the earliest thing of anything related to a career
[Guest]: that I ever you know even came across that that you may have this choice later
[Guest]: on in life that what to do in life you know and I was in grade 3 and 4 in our
[Guest]: school in the report card I would always get this my budding scientist something
[Guest]: like that teachers would write a comment and I think at that age these kind of
[Guest]: words somehow see I'm right now I'm almost 45 and I still remember those
[Guest]: words that were written in my report card so I think when teachers write
[Guest]: something like that and especially if the teachers you like write a comment
[Guest]: like that on your report card it's somewhere just plays on your mind and
[Guest]: you feel wow I am capable of this and it gives you that push and and that sense
[Guest]: that that is possible you know so I think that also stayed on my mind that
[Guest]: I maybe I'm supposed to do science maybe that's good for me but at the same time
[Guest]: I also loved writing early on as a kid like I had a lot of me time lot of
[Guest]: boredom because I didn't have a sibling for the longest time and I stayed with
[Guest]: my grandparents and I didn't have too many friends so all my spare time was
[Guest]: like spent writing something must be quite silly but I used to write and like
[Guest]: small poems and all I my mom has still preserved some diary sometime and
[Guest]: embarrassing embarrassingly she shows it to me at times it please I don't want
[Guest]: to see it now so I would keep writing and you know my aunts and my mom would
[Guest]: also say I'm good at this maybe you know it's something it's not not something I
[Guest]: ever thought about myself but there's a lot of little external influences that
[Guest]: unknowingly just settle down in the different you know levels of your head
[Guest]: and you feel maybe this maybe that I definitely loved English I loved words
[Guest]: and I loved the language and I said maybe this is this will make me happy
[Guest]: but in those days also there was a thing that you know if you got the least marks
[Guest]: in college is where you went to arts by default so the thing was you get a 95
[Guest]: plus you have you don't even have to think you're going into science
[Guest]: somewhere like 70s you're going to commerce and how 50s you're going to
[Guest]: arts and as stupid as that may sound today but that was how things were for
[Guest]: 70s kids we didn't really have any other options and for girls oh you like a good
[Guest]: you know feminine instinct and also medicine is good for you and boys you
[Guest]: like straightaway engineering you were not expected to think so much there was
[Guest]: nothing like career counseling and what is good for you what's your aptitude
[Guest]: nothing of that sort I think I was always going with the flow I never
[Guest]: really thought too much into it and neither did my family put like too much
[Guest]: thought like what is she going to do and they just thought whatever she does she
[Guest]: will do it okay like I was pretty self-motivated and driven so they didn't
[Guest]: really bother about what I'm going to do in my life and neither did I think about
[Amit Varma]: it to be honest so you know I did an episode with Sharda Ugra recently and in
[Amit Varma]: that Sharda was talking about how she was a 70s kid and I was saying I'm an
[Amit Varma]: 80s kid and the interesting thing is that you know you just gave your age
[Amit Varma]: away and I've realized I'm a little older than you and yet you are
[Amit Varma]: describing yourself as a 70s kid which I don't do because I don't really
[Amit Varma]: remember I was I was I was too much of a kid in the 70s to remember any of it so
[Amit Varma]: I think of myself more as an 80s kid because that is where my memories of
[Amit Varma]: kiddery were but I'm struck by a phrase that you used here which is something
[Amit Varma]: that you know was not even a phrase back in the day because it was the default
[Amit Varma]: and today is very much a phrase which is me time you know back in the day we had
[Amit Varma]: no me time because you know we have no laptops we have no internet we have no
[Amit Varma]: cell phones we have nothing you know if you're lucky we have some books around
[Amit Varma]: us but even even for a regular reader how much can you read so you you kind of
[Amit Varma]: do get a lot of me time that way and I know exactly what that's like so tell me
[Amit Varma]: a little bit about what kind of books did you read and what kind of writing
[Amit Varma]: did you do like firstly everything we write as children is obviously cringeworthy
[Amit Varma]: later if you're going to look at it with adult eyes obviously it's not going to
[Amit Varma]: pass standard no you should see what I wrote as a kid but nevertheless so what
[Amit Varma]: what were the kind of books that you read in those days and what kind of
[Guest]: writing did you like to do you know I have memories of this book a bookshop in
[Guest]: Napiency Road I think it was called Shobna I'm not very sure but I remember
[Guest]: going there like every fortnight with my grandfather and I've just opened that
[Guest]: door and this gush of cool very nice smelling air-conditioning would hit my
[Guest]: face and that itself was like so welcoming and that was just like one of
[Guest]: the many pleasures to be had when you enter that store those were still my
[Guest]: fairy tale and those kind of book reading days so I would pick up one book
[Guest]: and it was it was a store not a library so whatever my grandfather bought within
[Guest]: 10 minutes of coming home I would have finished reading that and he said okay
[Guest]: now you either read the same book again and again until I take you back or you
[Guest]: read something else so don't come and tell me it's finished so take your own
[Guest]: time with it so I think that that really made me eager made me an eager reader
[Guest]: just like taking me to the bookstore as a treat you know a lot of summer
[Guest]: holidays and holidays because I was living with my grandparents I would be
[Guest]: shooed off to my great-grandparents house during the holidays because I have
[Guest]: to go somewhere right I can't stay in the same place forever and holiday time
[Guest]: you have to shift and you know spend time with your other relatives or do
[Guest]: something that's what we used to do in like we had nothing else fancy to do in
[Guest]: our days my great-grandfather was a voracious reader like even like whatever
[Guest]: newspaper that he used to read literally end to end every word and sometimes he
[Guest]: would be lazing on in his easy chair and he would say that okay this full page
[Guest]: you have to read to me now and I would keep watching like is he asleep can I
[Guest]: stop reading because he doesn't seem to be listening to anything and sometimes
[Guest]: it used to be about politics and like absolutely the kind of subjects that you
[Guest]: may not be interested in at all or it makes no sense to you but he just wanted
[Guest]: you to read it to know that there are all these different words and all this
[Guest]: different vocabulary and sometimes he would make me like read something
[Guest]: complicated and say now write this very simply you know in one page or something
[Guest]: so that that's the kind of vacation fun quote-unquote that we had and also the
[Guest]: big thing that made me interested in these things that when I used to go
[Guest]: there during my holidays I was out of my comfort zone I didn't have my familiar
[Guest]: books and toys and whatever you know things that I was comfortable doing in
[Guest]: my free time so I had to find out new things to do and they had this balcony
[Guest]: and in that King Circle apartment complex there were like four or five
[Guest]: buildings and in between there was this big courtyard kind of space with a water
[Guest]: tank and all that and every afternoon a bunch of cows would come and sit there
[Guest]: for relaxation so these cows would be sitting there and swatting flies and
[Guest]: generally like chilled out and you can't imagine I've like watched them for hours
[Guest]: on end to kill my time because I had nothing better to do and other thing was
[Guest]: all because that was like the open courtyard where all the other buildings
[Guest]: could see what's happening all the vendors would come there right from salt
[Guest]: guy to banana guy vegetable guy and my other favorite pastime was to mimic all
[Guest]: their calls and because you know that this balcony level was like say to the
[Guest]: level of my shoulder or something so I could I would just mimic the call back
[Guest]: and hide under that thing so they would like wonder where is the sound coming
[Guest]: from and at the lower level there were these Jali so I could see that he's
[Guest]: wondering where's the sound coming from so these were the kind of creative
[Guest]: vacation pastimes that I had because I was no one else to play with and it's a
[Guest]: new place and I had I used to always take too much time making any friends so
[Guest]: it's not the place where I live regularly so I would not go out and play
[Guest]: with I don't know these people I can't go so this was you know all part of this
[Guest]: creative process and a way in which boredom really spurs on your creativity
[Guest]: to do something nice because you're so bored out of your skull and you say okay
[Guest]: let me do something fun you know let me write or let me draw something or let me
[Guest]: create something and later on I think I read the philosopher J Krishnamurti has
[Guest]: written something very similar that boredom is the best way to creativity
[Guest]: and I was like well I knew this from my childhood itself so I mean I don't
[Guest]: really remember what books I specifically read but a lot of fairy
[Guest]: tales Grimm's you know some inspirational autobiographies and and
[Guest]: then later on of course when I became a teenager I read all the usual paperbacks
[Guest]: that Sidney Sheldon Daniel Steele everything that was available in India
[Guest]: yeah I never read a Milson Boone though for the simple reason that I found that
[Guest]: it's too small I'll finish it too quickly so I don't even want to get into
[Guest]: this so I was reading the usual novels fiction I was not much into nonfiction I
[Amit Varma]: would love medical fiction also excellent you know and you know speaking
[Amit Varma]: of boredom being a spur to creativity there's also the saying about an idle
[Amit Varma]: mind being a devil's workshop but that that courtyard sounds so fascinating it
[Amit Varma]: sounds like a kind of a setting for an urban malgudi days as it were and indeed
[Amit Varma]: you know courtyards do have a special place in some Indian literature as well
[Amit Varma]: because almost like a gathering place of sorts and as the other sort of thread
[Amit Varma]: that I instantly connected with and I don't know if it's it's probably going
[Amit Varma]: to be a shared memory only for people of our generation is when you brought books
[Amit Varma]: and air-conditioning together you know you mentioned that you used to go to
[Amit Varma]: that store whatever it was in a PNC Road and the door would open and it blast of
[Amit Varma]: AC and I remember when I was in college in Ferguson College Pune I used to spend
[Amit Varma]: my afternoons at the British Council Library there on FC Road pretending to
[Amit Varma]: read books but actually combining my love for books with my love for
[Amit Varma]: air-conditioning so stuff that you know perhaps a future generation may take for
[Amit Varma]: granted you know unless there is a solar flare or something and there is no
[Amit Varma]: electricity and then they'll suddenly say how what was that we just went when
[Amit Varma]: they realize the importance of the internet and the electricity but I'm
[Amit Varma]: sounding too much like an old fogey now so tell me more about doing medical
[Amit Varma]: because on the one hand in this and you know in previous interviews you've kind
[Amit Varma]: of spoken about how you sort of wandered into doing medical because that was what
[Amit Varma]: was expected from a good student who were getting the kind of marks that you
[Amit Varma]: were but on the other hand you clearly had the aptitude and the bent of mind
[Amit Varma]: that a doctor actually needs and that bent of mind actually comes through in
[Amit Varma]: pretty much everything you have done since as well from what I can see which
[Amit Varma]: is you know sort of organized systematic going deeper and deeper into sort of
[Amit Varma]: first principles root causes all of that so tell me a little bit about what that
[Amit Varma]: process of doing medical was like did you you know was it natural for you was
[Amit Varma]: it easy for you was it something that interested you and was it something that
[Amit Varma]: you saw yourself doing for the rest of your life what was all of that like I
[Guest]: was always going with the flow and I had really not given a thought as to what
[Guest]: career I want to pursue and I got marks good enough to get a seat in a medical
[Guest]: college in Bombay and maybe if it was not in Bombay and if it was some rural
[Guest]: area my family would have thought twice about sending me away from this very
[Guest]: sheltered existence of the last 17 years but it was very much in Bombay and I
[Guest]: didn't have to stay in a hostel and things like that so I took admission in
[Guest]: that but I really didn't know what that life would be like even how would it be
[Guest]: to study medicine how would it be to practice medicine one thing I definitely
[Guest]: knew that it required a lot of dedication commitment and sacrifice to
[Guest]: practice medicine unless you are in a very specific branch like say pathology
[Guest]: but you could still get away with fixed working hours but if you were to
[Guest]: practice medicine or surgery then definitely you had to be available all
[Guest]: the time and when I joined I said you know yeah I if I do this I'm going to do
[Guest]: it well I am going to dedicate my life to being a good doctor if I get into
[Guest]: medical college it's not just you know studying for the heck of it because now
[Guest]: that I have got a seat I'm going to make the best of it you know there's this
[Guest]: incident that happened when I joined medical college it was the year of the
[Guest]: Mandal Commission and the admissions had got very delayed so you know in my times
[Guest]: the first year MBBS second MBBS and third MBBS were one and a half one and
[Guest]: a half one and a half years each so a total of four and a half years of
[Guest]: studies and one year of internship so that was five and a half years to
[Guest]: graduate so now in this one and a half years we had already joined six months
[Guest]: late because of the delay in the admission process when people are still
[Guest]: figuring out what kind of admissions to happen etc so but the first MBBS is also
[Guest]: a huge learning like within the first year itself your vocabulary goes up by
[Guest]: some 10,000 words because you are learning the kind of language which we
[Guest]: don't use as laypeople and just that kind of adjustment to seeing certain
[Guest]: things in such a stark light which was like a sheltered existence like me I've
[Guest]: never been exposed to anything and day one of medical college there is maybe a
[Guest]: little bit of some orientation or something huh you'll have these many
[Guest]: classes you'll have to get this much percentage this is the past percentage
[Guest]: some very basic orientation and then you know you're told come to the Anatomy
[Guest]: Hall so now they're 50 girls and 50 boys hundred kids in a class and a good like
[Guest]: 50-50 gender distribution there and okay you just wander into the Anatomy Hall
[Guest]: and first you're hit by that smell of formalin which literally makes you tear
[Guest]: up and like where am I come is someone like you know throwing gas some kind of
[Guest]: poisonous gas on my face by the time you recover from that you realize there are
[Guest]: tables and tables of naked dead bodies that you're staring at because it's a
[Guest]: dissection hall so all the unclaimed corpses are there and here you are with
[Guest]: a bunch of boys and girls that you've never met before in your life and you're
[Guest]: facing this scene which is like it's like a shock like I cannot explain I
[Guest]: don't think I've been so shocked in my life ever maybe today's kids may not
[Guest]: feel that way but we were still very innocent growing up and we didn't have
[Guest]: any exposure to any such gory stuff on TV or you know like Netflix that kids
[Guest]: now they just see and they brush off but for someone like me and I could
[Guest]: definitely tell it was the same for the boys and the girls in my class and it
[Guest]: was like a big big shock so that was like day one you feel like where have I
[Guest]: come you know and so that that smell and the sight and that general embarrassment
[Guest]: and everything put together so that was like and there were other classes like
[Guest]: in biochemistry and physiology but this is the one that stuck to me and I will
[Guest]: never forget that experience of that first day but we also adapt to something
[Guest]: strange like this so quickly. The new normal as it were. Exactly that new normal and within
[Guest]: like a couple of months we got used to seeing our anatomy professors
[Guest]: they will open their box on that very dissection table and start
[Guest]: eating their lunch and we would not cringe to see that also like you know
[Guest]: there's this dead body cut open in different stages and you know cadaver to
[Guest]: call it by the scientific term and somebody's just eating their lunch very
[Amit Varma]: coolly and like sharing do you want to eat this and that's also not advisable
[Guest]: right because it's not to be honest but I mean maybe I'm exaggerating a little
[Guest]: bit but even holding it in your hand with this view but it's not very
[Guest]: different from us watching absolutely gory stuff on Netflix and you know
[Guest]: eating our food in today's times we still do that right so but that that
[Guest]: also we got used to that and I think the other very very good memory of this
[Guest]: whole anatomy thing that I was still getting used to that it was my birthday
[Guest]: and you know we spent three three months dissecting each like one is HFN which is
[Guest]: head face and neck then what we call supex the arms then chest and abdomen
[Guest]: and then the lower extremities so in the head face and neck one very important
[Guest]: component is the brain where with a with a bone cutting machine the skull is cut
[Guest]: open and then they remove the brain and we are you know we understand what is in
[Guest]: the transverse section of each of the levels on the human brain right so it
[Guest]: was my birthday and we were cutting the brain and everybody sang happy birthday
[Guest]: to me it was I think about it now it was very amusing then but I think about it
[Guest]: now I think are we crazy or what like you know but but I think that's the
[Guest]: beauty of medical school you learn to see fun and you because your general
[Guest]: life is so you know full of fat books so much to study so much to learn you're
[Guest]: seeing disease you're seeing people in the worst stages of their life but you
[Guest]: learn to see some humor in things like these which keep you going I think it
[Guest]: provided some kind of you know soothing moments for the you're constantly
[Guest]: under stress and as a kid who was into every possible non-sporting
[Guest]: extracurricular activity like music or drawing or drama or anything I had to
[Guest]: give up everything when I joined medicine so that was also very here I
[Guest]: mean I had given up in 12th standard itself because had to make the most of
[Guest]: time and study etc so that also felt very I can't say depressing but it felt
[Guest]: like I had lost some of the fun in my life because these were the things I
[Guest]: really enjoyed doing and so that's how we learn to make the most of these
[Guest]: moments even in medical college when things felt like you know gloomy and you
[Guest]: were it was a tough I remember that time and I remember that it did feel quite
[Guest]: stressful because it was a huge jump getting used to regular science-based
[Guest]: college where you just learned physics chemistry biology to learning about humans
[Guest]: disease checking patients and you know hearing their stories and after all
[Guest]: imagine we just 17 years old just kids right I think in India we start this so
[Guest]: early in our foreign countries you have to finish your some full graduation and
[Guest]: then start studying medicine so here you can if you pass all your years in one
[Guest]: short you can well become a medical graduate at 22 which is very young to
[Guest]: kind of grasp the seriousness the realities and the kind of things that
[Guest]: accompany this very serious kind of study so these are my memories and yeah
[Guest]: I did well like I said the initial part of getting used to these things was a
[Guest]: struggle until then I could somehow my school and college I could get through
[Guest]: without studying much I would just you know pay attention in class and I could
[Guest]: manage to get good marks in the exams but this one some real effort had to go
[Guest]: into reading so much the books were so so huge so heavy that you wouldn't even
[Guest]: carry them anywhere you had to go where the book was the book couldn't come you
[Guest]: couldn't carry the book to you but it did instill in me a certain kind of
[Guest]: discipline of you know I used to wake up at 3 a.m. I think that's when I started
[Guest]: becoming a morning person so if I had to leave for college at around 7 I would
[Guest]: study from 3 to 6 because again a college was a train ride away and you
[Guest]: were exhausted when you came back home you couldn't really focus on studying at
[Guest]: that point of time so morning is when I felt this is the only time I can put in
[Guest]: some some time to study I had a natural liking for surgery because since
[Guest]: childhood I love to do things create things and not just speculate about okay
[Guest]: maybe will this work will that work so just get into the middle of the problem
[Guest]: and solve it and I always thought that I will pursue surgery in some form or the
[Guest]: other and I really liked it like think of it as a like a stitching or something
[Guest]: but in a very complex scenario where someone's life depends on it right I
[Guest]: loved surgery but I also liked medicine for the logic of it like a lot of things
[Guest]: in medicine are very logical if you understand certain basic principles even
[Guest]: without knowing pathophysiology of a particular disease you can kind of
[Guest]: interpret that this is how the things will progress and that kind of
[Guest]: application of logic I love that in medicine absolutely hated Gainac I would
[Guest]: like try to bunk every possible lecture without getting into trouble and just
[Guest]: watching women screaming and that kind of thing was not my cup of tea at all so
[Guest]: my first choice was surgery and my second choice was medicine but again I
[Guest]: had not finalized anything in my head I said I'll see how it goes and take it as
[Guest]: it comes and in my final year MBBS I got the results and I was declared failed
[Guest]: and for someone who has been a topper all my life it's good that I'm
[Guest]: reasonably strong mentally otherwise I don't know what would have been my
[Guest]: reaction to that I just I just couldn't believe that something like this could
[Guest]: happen and of course immediately I sent my papers for revaluation I had been
[Guest]: declared fail in medicine now out of 1,500 marks in final MBBS 500 is
[Guest]: medicine that's like one third of the entire curriculum which I have to
[Guest]: restudy if I'm not declared passed in the reval and just the thought of going
[Guest]: back to those books was like terrifying I just I said I had already done a good
[Guest]: job studying in the first place why am I supposed to do this all over again and
[Guest]: you know this was Bombay University and the center for all these corrections and
[Guest]: these admin work was in Kalina so literally every three four days I would
[Guest]: land up there and I would sit on that guy's head and think where is my paper
[Guest]: where's my reval I've not got it the next exam is nearing the re-examination
[Guest]: right and kind of I developed a rapport with that guy and he also started
[Guest]: sympathizing saying this girl you know she's confident that she's going to pass
[Guest]: but the corrected paper is just not coming I kind of started losing hope and
[Guest]: I there was no other way but I started studying again for the next examination
[Guest]: and just two days before the re-exam this guy calls me because by then I we
[Guest]: were already exchanged phone numbers the admin guy in the university he calls me
[Guest]: saying look your result has come you are passed so you come immediately and
[Guest]: collect the result I don't want to put it in post because then it will not
[Guest]: reach you by the time you have to go for the next exam I think I went like I was
[Guest]: in tears and happiness and like it was such a relief not to have to give that
[Guest]: exam all over again and it was quite anti-climatic how my four and a half
[Guest]: years of medical studies ended in this kind of very low and then a high kind of
[Guest]: a situation and it was very excruciating and like I said we're not that old and
[Guest]: we don't know how to take this kind of you know experiences in our life you're
[Guest]: not used to it and it was quite traumatic and I even remember that today
[Guest]: I wake up like with nightmares that I'm having to give my medical exam again
[Guest]: medicine exam again so that's where my medicine journey ended and like all my
[Guest]: classmates were shocked nobody could believe that I had failed and it was
[Guest]: kind of very embarrassing for me like how am I even going to face these people
[Guest]: you know not that I would think they would judge me but I was just judging
[Guest]: myself so badly and yeah so that that stint ended there. It's interesting you
[Amit Varma]: should talk about nightmares because you know I did arts and I did a BA in
[Amit Varma]: English literature only reason I chose that was because I knew I wouldn't have
[Amit Varma]: to study and obviously I sailed through and I never really cared about exams at
[Amit Varma]: all and yet for years afterwards I would get a nightmare that I hadn't managed to
[Amit Varma]: graduate or I wasn't getting my certificate or I had failed an exam
[Amit Varma]: while during those years it was never even on my mind I didn't give a shit I
[Amit Varma]: would have been happy to drop out so it's a very bizarre kind of not even a
[Amit Varma]: nightmare like a persistent dream that thankfully stopped a few years ago I was
[Amit Varma]: also stuck by how you said I became a morning person because I had to wake up
[Amit Varma]: at 3 a.m. like before this you were waking up as late as 5 a.m. having toast
[Amit Varma]: and jam and going to your agarwal classes and you become a morning person
[Amit Varma]: when you have to start waking up at 3. At an unearthly hour of 3. I love these
[Amit Varma]: definitions but the part that I love best about what you just told me about
[Amit Varma]: your medical years was that surreal scene that you cut open someone's skull
[Amit Varma]: and then they sing happy birthday you know that that sounds like a Louis
[Amit Varma]: Bonheur film almost or I can imagine you know an Eli Roth film starting like that
[Amit Varma]: where you have your opening scene close-up of skull the scalpel slices
[Amit Varma]: through it it opens out you know brains oozing out and then happy birthday to
[Amit Varma]: you starts and that's when the title starts have you have you seen do you
[Amit Varma]: watch horror films? Do I watch horror? No not much. There's this lovely series I
[Amit Varma]: love by Eli Roth who some would know for also being an actor he acted in
[Amit Varma]: Tarantino's Inglourious Basterds as well but he directed the series of films
[Amit Varma]: called Hostel which I think are absolutely brilliant there's just so much more so in
[Amit Varma]: in Hostel 2 there's a lovely scene towards the end where I don't know if
[Amit Varma]: I'll be judged for saying it's a lovely scene but it's a very striking scene
[Amit Varma]: right at the end where the end credits are happening where a bunch of people
[Amit Varma]: are kind of in the forest and two girls are being chased by someone I think and
[Amit Varma]: one of the girls is caught and she is beheaded and then they play football
[Amit Varma]: with a head and and and the end credits come on while they are playing football
[Amit Varma]: with a head and I thought as such a striking kind of scene and that's
[Amit Varma]: somehow what I remember. Mine was not as bad as that okay. It wasn't but it's the sort of the
[Amit Varma]: casualness of you know just that these are just body parts and what is a big
[Amit Varma]: deal and the whole casualness of it there of course the body part became a
[Amit Varma]: body part and not a living person because of actions on the part of the
[Guest]: protagonist well I'm sure you and your class never killed anyone. I don't want
[Guest]: people to judge me in thinking that you know we were too callous with the
[Guest]: cadavers we we would always thought you know like be very respectful and
[Guest]: grateful that people for whatever reason have landed up there and they are the
[Guest]: very reason that we are able to learn about the human body and understand you
[Guest]: know things which otherwise I mean at least in today's times of multimedia and
[Guest]: stuff you can still get a fair understanding even if you didn't dissect
[Guest]: a single cadaver but it was like really so important and the absolute basis of
[Guest]: everything you go on to learn later on in your medical school. And especially if
[Amit Varma]: you want to be a surgeon it's kind of essential I guess. Yeah no I mean I was
[Amit Varma]: drawn to that anecdote just by the element of black humor in there I guess
[Amit Varma]: which is but let's let's move past that to something less black which is riots
[Amit Varma]: you know you've also described how a sort of a jarring incident in your early
[Amit Varma]: years as a doctor which you remember as an important moment for your choosing to
[Amit Varma]: give it up even though it had nothing to do with the profession per se tell me a
[Guest]: little bit about that what went on there. Once I finished my medicine I was put
[Guest]: into the internship rounds right so you have one year of internship and all my
[Guest]: classmates and my good friends from college they had already started their
[Guest]: internship five months before me because I was literally waiting for five months
[Guest]: to even get my results and usually you do internships in groups like you know
[Guest]: five six of you are together so you have like and this is the time you're
[Guest]: actually starting to see patients as a doctor and although I must make this
[Guest]: remark that most of the male patients would call us sister thinking that
[Guest]: because we are women we can't be doctors and even like the guy who's the is the
[Guest]: last ranker in our class is a doctor doctor he'll be like treating him with
[Guest]: so much respect but we are like nothing so we would go about in a group you know
[Guest]: for internship and here I was left all by myself I had nobody like it's also so
[Guest]: difficult that even it's the first time you're actually starting to do things on
[Guest]: your own it's always good to have your back covered by your friends and you can
[Guest]: jointly discuss and say what's what are we going to do and you know even you're
[Guest]: not questioned also on your own like if a senior professor is questioning is
[Guest]: questioning a group here it's like literally everywhere you're on your own
[Guest]: and I felt very exposed and very lonely in the whole process of internship and
[Guest]: again it was a huge transition from being a student to being a doctor and
[Guest]: having no support no friends and being on on my own those days was very
[Guest]: difficult more than anything else for this reason I felt very bad that my
[Guest]: papers weren't corrected properly because again it took made me rethink my
[Guest]: decision and I thought maybe this is not the right thing for me just having been
[Guest]: left alone and somehow I managed to still complete everything and I came out
[Guest]: of my internship with a degree you know also there's this team of when a whole
[Guest]: bunch of kids are doing this together to discuss okay we're going to apply
[Guest]: they're going to give these exams we're going to study for it together we're
[Guest]: going to apply to these colleges these are the specialties we want I was
[Guest]: completely out of the loop in all those discussions and I had nobody to discuss
[Guest]: those things with and even that kind of you know removed some of the steam from
[Guest]: my being very serious about pursuing a good career in surgery or something like
[Guest]: that when I got my degree I said okay let me do one thing I will work as an
[Guest]: RMO for some time which is like a medical officer and then I see you know
[Guest]: depending on what I feel I will decide what I want to do further because now
[Guest]: anyway I'm not in the rat race I have already fallen behind by six months so
[Guest]: it doesn't matter there's no such rule that you have to join your PG as soon as
[Guest]: you finish your graduation so I was working there and I was straight put
[Guest]: into the ICU again very stressful because although I'm not expected to
[Guest]: take any decisions or do things on my own there's always the guidance of the
[Guest]: senior doctors the nurses etc but still it was like being thrown from straight
[Guest]: from one thing into like a boiling hot pan and have to figure out what to do
[Guest]: and you're only seeing critical patients again very stressful so that also made
[Guest]: me rethink whether this kind of stresses for a person like me is it good for my
[Guest]: temperament etc and I was there for like almost a year I think and somehow I was
[Guest]: learning all the you know ICU things around me because this is not something
[Guest]: that you're trained in in your medical colleges ICU work is like a whole
[Guest]: different ballgame everything is you know life and death decision kind of
[Guest]: thing it's a very high stress thing and now the intensivists are the one who are
[Guest]: like the forefront of the COVID warrior they are the ones taking these
[Guest]: decisions although you know given the lack of that many number of intensives
[Guest]: literally everybody has promoted themselves to be an intensivist because
[Guest]: we have to save these lives I was getting used to that and then one very
[Guest]: high-profile politician got admitted after an accident and he had a emergency
[Guest]: surgery and all that and you know somehow see any any such major accident
[Guest]: and surgery this bound to be a risk of developing some complication or the
[Guest]: other and which was clearly explained even before the surgery was done which
[Guest]: is why most hospitals won't take such patients because they don't want the
[Guest]: risk of someone dying on you when it was really not your fault to begin with
[Guest]: right fortunately once this person was discharged from the surgery he died
[Guest]: there was the crowd of at least 10 to 12 thousand people who are gathered
[Guest]: outside the hospital we were some of us RMOs on duty some two three senior
[Guest]: doctors some two three nurses all in the ICU and they locked up the ICU from
[Guest]: outside after they took away the body and you know they set fire to the
[Guest]: hospital and what it is they all just from what I know I didn't see this
[Guest]: personally but I was told that they just lay down in front of the gate so neither
[Guest]: firefighting you know fire engine nothing could even come in and they kind
[Guest]: of sealed us from outside and here and because of the fire to avoid short
[Guest]: circuit the powers were switched off and here you have patients on ventilators
[Guest]: and other like it's I think it was a 20 or 25 or 30 bed ICU and you're worried
[Guest]: about how are these other patients going to survive without electricity and the
[Guest]: burden of that of just losing people you're in the dark and those days of we
[Guest]: had Nokia cell phone I think literally my battery was also out I could not call
[Guest]: anyone and we were just hiding and we were inside and we were just praying and
[Guest]: like somehow the patient's relatives started just lifting them and carrying
[Guest]: them outside the hospital with all those IV lines and everything hanging and
[Guest]: those kind of pictures were in the newspapers for a few weeks after that
[Guest]: was very traumatizing and we were holed up in the ICU with the hospital burning
[Guest]: outside and like the whole night and then the next morning and I think I had
[Guest]: driven to the hospital I would rarely take the car but it was a Sunday or
[Guest]: something I said okay I'm not going to change to autos and buses and all and go
[Guest]: and I took the car and the car got not just my car all the cars standing in the
[Guest]: parking lot were completely charred we just came out to see their skeletons and
[Guest]: this whole mental trauma the police dropped us home to each of our houses
[Guest]: then we were asked to come and give statements and all that now we see so
[Guest]: much you know we hear so much about violence against doctors and this mob
[Guest]: mentality people beating up doctors etc but again those days I was new into this
[Guest]: I'd never heard of something like this could happen I'm generally a very soft
[Guest]: person don't like to get into any kind of you know controversy or just I like
[Guest]: to mind my own business so this was was very very very traumatizing and I could
[Guest]: just like I could not even go back to the hospital building where they had
[Guest]: called us to give our you know statements and stuff even that was
[Guest]: making me extremely panicky and I said I'm going to take a break from this
[Guest]: hospital work because this has I think it was like a huge turning point and one
[Guest]: would think that after five and a half years of studying to think about you
[Guest]: know not going back to that and especially in India you people will say
[Guest]: oh you did medicine and you're not practicing you wasted a seat you know
[Guest]: government subsidizes your education so much and you're not looking at patients
[Guest]: and stuff this is the standard thing that I have been facing since then
[Guest]: because ultimately I didn't get back to practice after that to seeing patients
[Guest]: and I have the standard retort I say that people who study you know say
[Guest]: chemical engineering in IIT and then they do like finance in IIM and then they
[Guest]: start a restaurant so how do you explain those kind of things like even those are
[Guest]: government subsidized education but no I think medicine is seen with such a kind
[Guest]: of put it on a pedestal and the fact that you are supposed to serve the
[Guest]: society back because you have wasted a seat in medicine kind of attitude I over
[Guest]: the years I've gotten used to it and I'm very much in touch with my college
[Guest]: classmates and on their whatsapp groups and they only keep forwarding silly
[Guest]: jokes because I think that's their way of coping with life you know like the
[Guest]: the funny things we see on Twitter are all in those groups and yeah so I think
[Guest]: that's that's how I didn't go back I mean I didn't I didn't quit that stage
[Guest]: of my life permanently I said I'll see what happens again going with the flow
[Guest]: attitude but then I did find other interesting things to do and I didn't
[Guest]: really think that I had to practice medicine just because I had studied that
[Guest]: knowledge and that kind of processing information and that kind of
[Guest]: responsibility and dedication and commitment I think those kind of values
[Guest]: are never going to go away and I'm not going to waste what I learned and I
[Guest]: definitely I will be in touch with it in one way or the other I'm just not seeing
[Guest]: patients so I think that's how that whole cycle came around yeah you know
[Amit Varma]: now that you mentioned that incident I remember reading about it in the papers
[Amit Varma]: in those days and it's it's absolutely kind of horrendous what happened and
[Amit Varma]: speaking of your erstwhile profession like if there's anyone who has come out
[Amit Varma]: of you know what has happened in the last few months with any kind of credit
[Amit Varma]: it's really the frontline healthcare workers and the doctors and the nurses
[Amit Varma]: and I've seen some of that firsthand the kind of thankless work that they sort of
[Amit Varma]: put in and and what strikes me here is you know that typically before this you
[Amit Varma]: know the medical profession would kind of get a bad name that oh look it's so
[Amit Varma]: expensive and they are fleecing and they are making you do all these tests when
[Amit Varma]: you don't need to and they're all vultures and this and that and where is
[Amit Varma]: the Hippocratic Oath and yet in these very difficult times it seems to me that
[Amit Varma]: it's it's fair to say and it's not even sort of a generalization but it's
[Amit Varma]: absolutely fair to say that the other ones who've stepped up the most and gone
[Amit Varma]: way beyond the call of duty in you know what they've done though obviously it
[Amit Varma]: could be selection bias from what I have sort of seen with my own eyes but all
[Amit Varma]: the reports seem to back up that that's exactly what is happening also it's not
[Guest]: sorry it's not like they've had a choice also no matter what their own mental
[Guest]: state and whether they are actually capable of handling this kind of crisis
[Guest]: like you study medicine but you're not you're you don't expect that you will
[Guest]: encounter a pandemic in your lifetime because it has not happened in the last
[Guest]: hundred years and while your life is already stressful and you have these
[Guest]: emergency night calls but not this 24 by 7 stress where you don't see light at
[Guest]: the end of the tunnel and you don't know when you can stop going to work and take
[Guest]: one small break or you can be with your family or you you don't have to be in
[Guest]: that suffocating PPE so my heart literally goes out and I feel maybe at
[Guest]: this point I feel maybe I took a right decision because I I don't think I
[Guest]: would have been able to cope with I mean not for the lack of wanting to help
[Guest]: people but definitely it's not my kind of something that I can bear emotionally
[Guest]: as well seeing this kind of suffering I can't just take it and not be affected
[Amit Varma]: by it my my sense is if you were still in the profession you would have stepped
[Guest]: up and done what you had to do but maybe I think maybe yeah you're right but I
[Guest]: because I'm not there I feel maybe I would have totally crumbled but when
[Guest]: you're there that's a that's a different kind of an adrenaline rush and your you
[Guest]: know dedication that you want to do something for people and I think yeah
[Guest]: you're right maybe I would have I can't I can't tell now
[Amit Varma]: No and it's almost dichotomous that I'm struck by like on the one hand you have
[Amit Varma]: that negative impression of doctors always sort of fleecing patients and
[Amit Varma]: doing this and doing that and in a sense they're responding to incentives but here
[Amit Varma]: what what what you what you see a lot of where I think people have gone beyond
[Amit Varma]: the call of duty in what they have done and typically like I have seen doctors
[Amit Varma]: and you know people who work in ICUs for example who are just harangued by
[Amit Varma]: relatives of dead patients and you know who are also obviously upset and they
[Amit Varma]: are so calm and they deal with it so well and they're just going in there day
[Amit Varma]: in day out and kind of getting the job done and I don't know what incentives
[Guest]: function there no incentive is good enough for this it has to come out of
[Guest]: your own drive because I don't think what can you give to make people go
[Amit Varma]: through this nothing yeah no no it's it's fantastic but moving on from sort
[Amit Varma]: of that kind of darker subject you know when you were talking about how other
[Amit Varma]: professions are allowed to flit all over the place and you said chemical
[Amit Varma]: engineering and then finance in a bank and then started a restaurant and it
[Amit Varma]: sounded so incredibly specific that right after this is over I'm gonna
[Guest]: google if there's no specific I just use this in any kind of co-permutation
[Amit Varma]: combination I don't have anyone in mind okay we have that disclaimer but
[Amit Varma]: imagine if there's one poor guy who accidentally happens to fit this in I'm
[Guest]: not I'm not doing the equivalent of slight reading on a podcast no yes
[Amit Varma]: light reading is horrible no it's just Twitter can be so horrible sometimes
[Amit Varma]: when you know I mean for people who sort of want to be generally straightforward
[Amit Varma]: so you know what we've chatted for more than an hour about your personal life
[Amit Varma]: and we'll quickly do a little bit more of it after the break and then we'll go
[Amit Varma]: on to the food but for the moment let's now take a quick commercial break and if
[Amit Varma]: you are listening to this episode it would be entirely appropriate if you go
[Amit Varma]: get yourself a healthy snack right now
[Amit Varma]: have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it well
[Amit Varma]: I'd love to help you over the last year I've enjoyed teaching my online course
[Amit Varma]: the art of clear writing and an online community has now sprung up of all my
[Amit Varma]: past students we have workshops a newsletter to showcase the work of
[Amit Varma]: students and vibrant community interaction that offers much
[Amit Varma]: stimulation and even some comfort in these difficult times in the course
[Amit Varma]: itself through four webinars spread over four weekends I share all I know about
[Amit Varma]: the craft and practice of clear writing there are many exercises much
[Amit Varma]: interaction and a lovely and lively community at the end of it the course
[Amit Varma]: costs rupees 10,000 plus GST or about a hundred and fifty dollars and the May
[Amit Varma]: classes begin on May 1st Saturday May 1st so if you're interested head on over
[Amit Varma]: now to register at indiancut.com slash clear writing that's indiancut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing being a good writer doesn't require God-given talent just a
[Amit Varma]: willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine
[Amit Varma]: your skills I can help you. Welcome back to the seen and the unseen I'm chatting
[Amit Varma]: with Nandita Iyer about her superb book everyday superfoods and about a very
[Amit Varma]: interesting life and her journey into learning more about food but before we
[Amit Varma]: actually get to the food so to say let's kind of go back to the way your life is
[Amit Varma]: unwinding after you have you know left medicine because of politics as it were
[Amit Varma]: at this point in time what is your conception of yourself what do you want
[Amit Varma]: to do what are the you know parts that you're thinking about so definitely I
[Guest]: wasn't a kind of I was in a crossroad and I didn't I didn't really know what
[Guest]: my next steps would be and one option definitely was to maybe start like a
[Guest]: general practitioner kind of a practice because there was always a huge emphasis
[Guest]: on being a super specialist and stuff but even in those days that whole GP
[Guest]: concept was dying down to have like a friendly neighborhood doctor who can
[Guest]: take care of all your basic problems and I thought I'm okay for that level of
[Guest]: stress and I can still handle that that was one thing on my mind and the second
[Guest]: thing was that what else can I do with now that I have my medical degree can I
[Guest]: study like an MBA or can I do some other further studies which will open up some
[Guest]: more paths to me other than just being a clinical doctor while I was thinking
[Guest]: about these things I got a job opportunity in health insurance related
[Guest]: company where they were looking for doctors to understand certain aspects of
[Guest]: the claims and you know because a general person will not really know okay
[Guest]: this was the ailment and all this was done for this ailment so you need
[Guest]: someone to actually know what was actually required and what were not
[Guest]: required so to sort out those kind of things and because I didn't want to sit
[Guest]: at home for a single day and at this point an idle mind would have definitely
[Guest]: been a devil's workshop with all the stuff that I had experienced and gone
[Guest]: through and come out of and I think that would have been the right time to see a
[Guest]: therapist or something but that was out of question I didn't even know about you
[Guest]: know those kind of terminologies and even having studied medicine I didn't
[Guest]: even think of it as an option at that point of time there was this opening in
[Guest]: a health insurance related company and I just went and I took on that job and it
[Guest]: would keep my mind occupied and I said like while I do this I can understand if
[Guest]: this is something to my liking or I can see what else to do and I worked in that
[Guest]: field for two to three years and but again I've always been like a very
[Guest]: creative person and I need some kind of creativity and some that that's the
[Guest]: thing that gives me joy and here I was neither seeing patients and nor am I
[Guest]: doing anything creative that makes me happy and I said this okay while I was
[Guest]: getting some decent salary and stuff and I was not wasting my time at home I was
[Guest]: not entirely satisfied with what I was doing it felt very dry and boring at
[Guest]: this point I should also mention that I was a very early adopter into social
[Guest]: media even before the term social media existed so there was this networking
[Guest]: site called the rise business networking early on I didn't know what it was but I
[Guest]: just made an account for myself and I was connecting with a lot of people
[Guest]: around also because I was not in touch with my own classmates and you know five
[Guest]: and a half years of doing medicine leaves you with no friends no nothing in
[Guest]: your social life and you don't know anybody so then I said okay let me join
[Guest]: this I'll at least get to know people from other fields because you've been
[Guest]: living in a literal blinkered existence for from the day you step into medical
[Guest]: college you don't know what is happening in the outside world so I joined this
[Guest]: website and I came across people from advertising from so many different I
[Guest]: think Prem Panikkar and all I knew from that site early on because that same
[Guest]: gang moves on to every new good platform everybody is on Twitter now so literally
[Guest]: I know them for like 20 years I think so so I went on to that platform and I found
[Guest]: out thanks to that I came to know that there is something called health care
[Guest]: advertising which I would have not known otherwise and you know there's this
[Guest]: certain law which says that once you have heard about something you tend to
[Guest]: keep seeing similar things around you right I forget what's the name for that
[Guest]: phenomenon immediately after I saw that in a couple of days there was this
[Guest]: article in the Sunday supplement of Times of India about this new field
[Guest]: called health care advertising and all I said wow I just came to know about this
[Guest]: two days ago and now I'm reading about it in the newspaper I mean is this a
[Guest]: sign maybe I can apply my medical knowledge I can write it is creative and
[Guest]: it kind of seemed exciting to me at that point of time and I said but how on
[Guest]: earth I've never given a job interview in my life I don't have any management
[Guest]: degree I don't have any advertising background all I have is a medical
[Guest]: degree what am I going to how am I going to get this and somehow through one of
[Guest]: the contacts and drives I got the contact of the woman who was heading
[Guest]: Ogilvy health care which is a branch of Ogilvy and Mathur a very leading ad
[Guest]: agency which is all over the world and this was the Mumbai branch so I just you
[Guest]: know some sometimes I have the spurt of confidence and drive I said let's do it
[Guest]: worst case what will happen she'll say get lost at least it would not be for
[Guest]: want of not trying so I just contacted her and I said I want to come and meet
[Guest]: you can you give me like 15-20 minutes of your time and also these are the
[Guest]: places where your doctor's degree sometimes helps because the minute they
[Guest]: see a doctor's degree they think they can't be such a nonsense person they
[Guest]: have some you know some substance in them and people don't refuse you when
[Guest]: you request for a meeting like this so I went and met her and she heard me out
[Guest]: and she said I said I want to be a part of this but to be honest I don't even
[Guest]: know what are the available options for me but somehow I feel like I could fit
[Guest]: in here I think I would feel that kind of creative fulfillment at place like
[Guest]: this what she did was very interesting she gave me a project and said I'm
[Guest]: giving you two weeks you do this project in whatever way I'm not going to give
[Guest]: you any guidelines or how we work out here you will just figure it out with
[Guest]: your own logic and you do this and you come back to me and I did it and I went
[Guest]: back in two weeks and I got the job and she said okay so I joined a strategy
[Guest]: planner so in healthcare advertising this was mainly for the pharma companies
[Guest]: so these are the kind of brochures and literatures that the medical
[Guest]: representatives take to the doctors and they tell them about these new drugs and
[Guest]: but also there are the same drug is manufactured by five ten different
[Guest]: companies so how do you gain some mind space in the doctor's head that he
[Guest]: remembers your brand better maybe because you conveyed it in a better way
[Guest]: or for whatever reason so that was the speciality of this field where you made
[Guest]: a creative communication rather than just dry blah blah blah twice a day you
[Guest]: give this is the milligram this is the side effect you know going beyond that
[Guest]: and trying to catch some emotions and that's the typical Ogilvy way of doing
[Guest]: things where everything has their own touch and their spin and they make
[Guest]: anything and they can make fevicol interesting so you can imagine how it is
[Guest]: so that's how I you know got the job and I really enjoyed it but there was one
[Guest]: you know one drawback was that these guys are all like very late starters in
[Guest]: the day and I'm a morning person I'll be there by 830 in the morning and people
[Guest]: come in by 1231 and when I wanted to leave on time they'll say are a half day
[Guest]: kind of you know because no one knows that you've been working from early and
[Guest]: and that whole culture was very different for someone coming from a
[Guest]: medical background it's very laid-back if there's a deadline for 5 p.m. 430 is
[Guest]: when people will start working on something which would like make me very
[Guest]: panicky because I I'm not although even I do my best when you know the deadline
[Guest]: is closest but I'll not start my work half an hour before I have to submit it
[Guest]: that is something that will drive me crazy out of you know anxiety that I've
[Guest]: not started my work so I got used to that kind of lifestyle also where again
[Guest]: all from different fields one somebody's in art somebody's a client servicing and
[Guest]: I am here dealing like in middleman between the advertising and the pharma
[Guest]: company so then by now I was in my late 20s after all these winding you know
[Guest]: side paths that I had taken and I was chugging along and then I got married in
[Guest]: my late 20s and at that time my husband had a job in the US and that was
[Guest]: literally the first time I I think I traveled outside the country and I went
[Guest]: to I went I went off to the East Coast with him after I got married and that
[Guest]: was the first time in my life I was sitting at home 100% leisure nothing to
[Guest]: do no deadlines and all my time is my own to do as I please and you know after
[Guest]: I think after middle school like fifth standard sixth standard seventh standard
[Guest]: this was the first time I was in truly zone where I had nothing to account for
[Guest]: and I could just do my own thing and that is when the food bug bit me because
[Guest]: I used to I was fascinated by the kind of channels that were on TV and I was
[Guest]: even more fascinated that there was a channel to tell you what's going on on
[Guest]: all the other channels and for someone who has only seen like Krishi Darshan and
[Guest]: stuff back home because that's when my TV watching days also stopped after that
[Guest]: there was no chance to watch TV and I was totally fascinated and there was a
[Guest]: food network channel which was showing 24 by 7 food things on you know anytime
[Guest]: if you couldn't get sleep or you were jet-lagged you just started the TV and
[Guest]: you could watch like someone cooking and I found that like utterly fascinating
[Guest]: and then all apartments they come with this built-in oven which again I was
[Guest]: seeing for the first time I've never had an oven in my life so like it took me
[Guest]: two days to even figure out how what is on what is off what because everyone
[Guest]: just uses it as a storage to keep extra pots and pans so just took a while to
[Guest]: figure that out and then all that inspiration from food TV plus the
[Guest]: supermarkets with all the supplies and like so many things to buy which we
[Guest]: didn't have and this was in the year 2004 even though we had supermarkets in
[Guest]: India at that time that kind of variety even today you will not find right so
[Guest]: all that put together I actually started cooking and experimenting and I would
[Guest]: say experimenting because I really didn't know much about like even I didn't
[Guest]: know the exact recipe for a sambar or a rasam or anything for that matter so I
[Guest]: think all that inspiration put together is when I started cooking and
[Guest]: experimenting and those days it's not like you had whatsapp so you could
[Guest]: quickly call your mom and literally keep the stuff on the gas and say now tell me
[Guest]: how do I make this so I started I would call her and I would start making notes
[Guest]: and at least certain things that reminded me of home and the stuff food that I had
[Guest]: enjoyed in my childhood I wanted to recreate that because it was the first
[Guest]: time I was away from home it was in the East Coast where nine months of winter
[Guest]: literally getting dark at 3 o'clock you did need that comforting situation you
[Guest]: know to replicate like a feeling of home and that's when I actually started
[Amit Varma]: cooking. So you know that whole journey is very fascinating and different
[Amit Varma]: aspects there but first of all you mentioned deadlines that if there was a
[Amit Varma]: five o'clock deadline your colleagues would start working at 5.30 at 4.30 and
[Amit Varma]: I would actually when there's a five deadline I start working at 4.55 and
[Amit Varma]: there's this great quote by Douglas Adams my listeners might like which is
[Amit Varma]: quote I love deadlines I love the whooshing noise they make as they go by
[Amit Varma]: stop quote although I would never advise any of my students to be so lax with
[Amit Varma]: deadlines but I am I'm terrible with them I like that quote though I love
[Amit Varma]: that quote yeah it's I think I quoted Adams in the last episode as well which
[Amit Varma]: makes it seem like I'm some kind of Adams fanboy and I'm actually not but
[Amit Varma]: these are great quotes though I'm not a hater either so so to kind of get back
[Amit Varma]: to what you mentioned about cooking is it in some way an advantage or does it
[Amit Varma]: give you a different kind of way at looking at cooking the fact that you
[Amit Varma]: learned it so late like for example I didn't do economics in college so
[Amit Varma]: whatever I learned about economics or political philosophy or whatever I
[Amit Varma]: learned much later in my life and therefore I wasn't bound say by the
[Amit Varma]: dogmas or the reflexive thinking of whatever the education system might tell
[Amit Varma]: you so I didn't read only the Keynesians but also the Austrians and also whatever
[Amit Varma]: and it's kind of broader and I feel that that's kind of an advantage the fact
[Amit Varma]: that I am learning different things on my own at different points in time and
[Amit Varma]: all of that going into the prism through which I sort of look at things is in a
[Amit Varma]: sense an advantage do you feel that in terms of cooking the fact that you know
[Amit Varma]: a lot of people will learn cooking by just picking up habits when they are
[Amit Varma]: kids that is go as a banana tea and this is how you do this and this is how you
[Amit Varma]: do that and you are almost learning everything from scratch right from how
[Amit Varma]: to turn an oven on and you're learning all the basics from scratch do you feel
[Amit Varma]: that one that that helped you and made you a little different from you know
[Amit Varma]: others who might have learned as kids and just internalized a lot of habits
[Amit Varma]: whether good or bad and do you think that it forced you to explicitly think
[Amit Varma]: about food about the process of cooking and that might have played a part in you
[Guest]: know what you then went on to become yeah I mean you are right and now that
[Guest]: you mention it I definitely feel like it did play a part in making me a more
[Guest]: fearless not bound to rules kind of a cook and I don't believe in like this is
[Guest]: the hundred percent authentic recipe that I must take to if it tastes good
[Guest]: it's good and yeah like in having different kinds of combinations which
[Guest]: traditionally you know we may not be cooking it together or serving two kinds
[Guest]: of dishes together I never had such hang-ups I would cook anything with
[Guest]: anything a few months ago I had posted this on Twitter like dosa with the
[Guest]: rajma okay so I got I got trolled by both the South Indians and the North
[Guest]: Indians how dare you like you know that Greta Thunberg gif how dare you kind of
[Guest]: thing that people were sending me and which is why I'm not bound to this you
[Guest]: know I I feel this is a good combination I like it and I'm not following anybody's
[Guest]: rules not even my grandmother's rules about what to be served with what and I'm
[Guest]: I'm eating this myself or I'm serving this to my family who don't mind eating
[Guest]: it so why is it anybody else's problem right so definitely made me a more
[Guest]: creative cook made me work with a whole lot of different ingredients which I
[Guest]: found in US at that time and it just kept my mind very open because I had no
[Guest]: set things to follow in the first place like only these vegetables can go into
[Guest]: sambar or with this sambar only this curry no such hang-ups I like whatever
[Guest]: is available or whatever I find fascinating and whatever I pick up from
[Guest]: the shop I would just cook with that I had no plan as such you know I I didn't
[Guest]: think about this factor at all but definitely I think it played a role in
[Guest]: how I started cooking and I continue to cook today and you also kind of
[Amit Varma]: mentioned that you know in your advertising days you know when you were
[Amit Varma]: writing copy and you were like an in-between between the pharma and the
[Amit Varma]: marketing people and I guess one of the things you were doing at that time is a
[Amit Varma]: skill that you practice anyway when it comes to food and is a skill that would
[Amit Varma]: in some senses have been inherent to you which is that you break down a complex
[Amit Varma]: idea in simple language and and the thing is when you're to have to do that
[Amit Varma]: is a great way to even learn about something because if you if you force
[Amit Varma]: yourself to put something in simple language you are you know and forcing
[Amit Varma]: yourself to understand it that much better so is that kind of that way of
[Amit Varma]: thinking that systematic assimilative way of thinking where you know you build
[Amit Varma]: a base and then you start from there is that something that you feel has always
[Amit Varma]: been there with you because that's also the approach that you will that you
[Amit Varma]: bring to your food writing for example that is and I imagine that even when
[Amit Varma]: you're you know learning Indian classical music that's partly it you
[Amit Varma]: know you you figure out certain first principles certain rules of the game and
[Amit Varma]: then you play around with those and then it gets more and more complex but your
[Amit Varma]: base is very solid at that point so is that kind of explicit thinking something
[Amit Varma]: that you do for whatever you take up or is it something that you had to do for
[Amit Varma]: the different things you've taken up what's what's your mindset like because
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that a lot of other people who might write about food for example
[Amit Varma]: will almost you know take an almost intuitive approach to it where it will
[Amit Varma]: be like you know if they're doing a food review it will almost be like what is
[Amit Varma]: their sensory experience while you know taking something while I think that you
[Amit Varma]: know people like you and Krish Ashok who was on the show earlier a kind of more
[Amit Varma]: methodical thinking a little harder about it tell me a bit about that
[Amit Varma]: mindset is that something that you've tried to build and cultivate or is that
[Amit Varma]: even something that in self-reflective moments you've kind of thought about
[Guest]: when it comes to how you go about your work so like we were discussing earlier
[Guest]: I value the impact of almost everything that I have done in the past be it
[Guest]: medical college be it a healthcare advertising or the long stint in
[Guest]: freelance writing I think everything contributes even without your knowing it
[Guest]: small bits and pieces towards making you who you are and making your processes
[Guest]: the way they are when it comes to working so while I definitely like to
[Guest]: have a very intuitive approach to things like you know we talk about first draft
[Guest]: second draft my first draft is very stream of consciousness very intuitive I
[Guest]: don't I don't even think about how is the flow or is it I just put what's on
[Guest]: my mind and that's what lends that personal touch also and not make it
[Guest]: sound very like a science project methodical or a science paper kind of a
[Guest]: writing and then you know thinking about the flow thinking about what more
[Guest]: details could be added what more don't I know about the subject that I need to
[Guest]: study research a little bit on the side and then come back to add those kind of
[Guest]: details because it has never happened that I've written on a subject and I
[Guest]: knew everything about it on day one or when I started writing that I've only
[Guest]: learned more and more as I've written and you know then that knowledge gets
[Guest]: applied into the next thing you do so you just gets carried forward and yeah
[Guest]: so I think it's a combination of both definitely intuitive and because I'm by
[Guest]: nature very disciplined and I like to have a certain method to doing things
[Guest]: because I'm also the other extreme where if I don't have a method I can be
[Guest]: completely mad so for my own sanity I like to keep a certain method you know
[Guest]: break it down into smaller chunks and make sure I'm able to give my attention
[Guest]: to every of these little parts of any project that I'm working on so like you
[Guest]: rightly said even Indian classical music I learned Carnatic for quite a few
[Guest]: years as a kid and then I think maybe in my adulthood as a rebellion to be
[Guest]: rebellion to having forced to learn Carnatic music I started learning
[Guest]: Hindustani classical and it is something I definitely enjoyed more I found that
[Guest]: there is more scope for creativity and it's a less hard on you with in terms of
[Guest]: rules and stuff of course there are plenty of rules and I don't even claim
[Guest]: to know fully well the differences between the two streams even though I've
[Guest]: learned but you know applying these principles just makes it a little bit
[Guest]: easier which otherwise a vast subject like this it can feel completely
[Amit Varma]: difficult to even approach let alone conquer yeah absolutely and and I love
[Amit Varma]: the phrase that you just used here carry forward it which is such a charmed
[Guest]: forward Indianism no I'm not making fun of you I think it's a charming phrase
[Amit Varma]: and language evolves carry forward did so what you what what you also did
[Amit Varma]: during this time is you also did a diploma or a degree in nutrition I think
[Guest]: right so tell me a little bit more about that so in 2004 I went to the US for a
[Guest]: year or so and then I came back to India and the cooking bug had bitten me good
[Guest]: and proper so I continued you know my biggest worry in coming back to India
[Guest]: was how am I going to get those ingredients you know and the minute I
[Guest]: land have to get myself an oven because I wanted to continue that process even
[Guest]: though I was back home I was back in Bombay and I continued cooking and again
[Guest]: experimental I had not gained any expertise in just like nine months to
[Guest]: one year of cooking so you know at those in those days there was some few cooking
[Guest]: websites like this sify.com Bhavarchi they had one section then like there was
[Guest]: I think Tarla Dalal had set up a website or I don't remember but there were very
[Guest]: few cooking websites so you could get recipes from these websites and there
[Guest]: was my biggest regret was there was no food network in India and there were no
[Guest]: food good food channels in India and there was no way to get them also but
[Guest]: anyway I had got enough inspiration from there and I just needed that to keep
[Guest]: continuing and when I did that I realized that I was so experimental and
[Guest]: intuitive in my cooking that I could never replicate a dish if it turned out
[Guest]: good because I didn't even know what I put into it in the first place I would
[Guest]: just keep putting things as I went right so then I said okay I need to start a
[Guest]: blog and this is how I will keep everything in one place and I can refer
[Guest]: to it myself I had no inkling that there was somebody going to search for recipes
[Guest]: on the web and land up on my blog and I didn't think that was going to happen at
[Guest]: all but then within a few weeks I got some comments and I realized that
[Guest]: there's a whole bunch of food bloggers out there mostly Indians in the US they
[Guest]: were trying to preserve their culture and you know like calling parents and
[Guest]: taking recipes and putting it down in this permanent kind of format where they
[Guest]: could access it at any time and which is why I thought oh this is already there
[Guest]: so I should continue at this and I whatever I would experiment at home I
[Guest]: would keep posting it on my blog and I think a year passed and I surprisingly
[Guest]: didn't get bored of it because I would have thought like okay you know blogger
[Guest]: had a very simple interface like if you could type you could just do it and it
[Guest]: was easy I kept continuing it at it and then I said okay I think I should
[Guest]: actually study nutrition properly because in medical school it's hardly
[Guest]: touched upon although there's one subject called preventive and social
[Guest]: medicine in the second IBBS but in that it's mostly the preventive disease
[Guest]: preventing diseases talking about things like polio tuberculosis vaccination
[Guest]: public health essentially while nutrition should have been integral to
[Guest]: this topic it wasn't and we hardly touched upon anything like our
[Guest]: knowledge of nutrition was as good as any layperson's knowledge and I said if
[Guest]: I'm writing so much about food and now I'm cooking so much I should know a
[Guest]: little bit more than what I know already so which is why I did this fellowship in
[Guest]: applied nutrition from Apollo which was a distance come residential kind of a
[Guest]: course and that helped me a lot in understanding things which I either knew
[Guest]: very haphazardly or I didn't know about at all so I thought it would be a great
[Guest]: way to marry the hobby and my qualification and it would just narrow
[Guest]: the gap and bring it somehow together but I think I'm doing I'm saying all
[Guest]: this in retrospect I didn't think so much then I just thought this is a good
[Guest]: idea and I'm learning something so it's not wasted anyway I will put it to use
[Guest]: and that's when I did that course and then it just you know that that's when I
[Guest]: started moving the niche of my blog and my writing I started I was a regular
[Guest]: writer for Men's Health India and I would write mostly on nutrition and
[Guest]: health related topics and also quite a bit of well-researched things in you
[Guest]: know nutrition the science of it etc because men's health is a very very
[Guest]: health focused magazine and you know everything is like proper verified
[Guest]: information and it's not just saying things which are popular on the internet
[Guest]: kind of thing so so that that course in nutrition helped me kind of figure out
[Guest]: what I want my focus to be over the next years and it also helped because I was
[Guest]: cooking a lot I was getting a lot more interested in food and you know I would
[Guest]: want to call friends home so I could try out different things and make lots of
[Guest]: food and serve people because otherwise it's just my husband and me how much are
[Guest]: we going to cook and eat I would look forward to these you know calling people
[Guest]: over and yeah so I think that that was the other turning point actually
[Guest]: focusing on nutrition and whereby using my education in somewhat a good way
[Guest]: where I can contribute my knowledge of you know the human body physiology
[Guest]: biochemistry everything and nutrition coming together nicely and it kind of
[Amit Varma]: strikes me that the science of nutrition is a bit of a contrast to the science of
[Amit Varma]: medicine for example in the sense that the science of medicine you know what
[Amit Varma]: you know is what you know and of course there are things you don't know and you
[Amit Varma]: find out more about them but as far as what you know is concerned it's fairly
[Amit Varma]: settled it will evolve in terms of going deeper but you're not going to find that
[Amit Varma]: what you thought was a fundamental truth is completely false while I think in
[Amit Varma]: nutrition in a sense that has kind of happened like one of my pet themes and
[Amit Varma]: it's a surprise I haven't really done an episode on it is you know how America's
[Amit Varma]: obesity epidemic was actually caused by the state where for decades we had this
[Amit Varma]: impression that sugar is fine and fat is evil while in recent times we have
[Amit Varma]: realized that that's absolutely not true and for those who are further interested
[Amit Varma]: you know there's a great book by Gary Taubes called the case against sugar
[Amit Varma]: there's a great book by Nina Tycoles called the big fat surprise I'll link
[Amit Varma]: them from the show notes I think Tycoles also did a good episode with Joe Rogan
[Amit Varma]: on them but the TLDR of that or what fundamentally happened is that these
[Amit Varma]: cases were made to find out more about heart disease these studies were done
[Amit Varma]: rather to find out more about heart disease in the 50s and 60s and they were
[Amit Varma]: funded by the sugar lobby you know the methodology was suspect and they made
[Amit Varma]: fat the big villain and absorbed sugar while today we know that fundamentally
[Amit Varma]: sugar is poison certainly in certain forms and you know in processed foods
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth so it's very interesting that it's you know on the
[Amit Varma]: one hand you do medicine where the science is kind of settled but on the
[Amit Varma]: other hand you're doing nutrition where it seems like the whole world is being
[Amit Varma]: upended every two years and there are more and more sort of new things coming
[Amit Varma]: out how does one then cope with that because then the concept of healthy
[Amit Varma]: changes a little bit like when I was growing up I remembered at fatty foods
[Amit Varma]: weren't good you know even when it came to meats people were moving to leaner
[Amit Varma]: meats which we now know is completely unnecessary and at the same time you
[Amit Varma]: know it was okay to drink coke and and you know with all its many spoons of
[Amit Varma]: sugar or whatever it is which is just insane and you've got a nice little
[Amit Varma]: screed against processed foods in your book so tell me a little bit about how
[Amit Varma]: you're thinking of nutrition evolved in this period of time because there are
[Amit Varma]: also so many fads and fashions going on and it's almost like different
[Amit Varma]: ideological camps form around these things so when when you so what was your
[Amit Varma]: what's your take on this what was your approach of all this you're right
[Guest]: because you know study of disease and the study of nutrition are like
[Guest]: completely different things happening and definitely there has been more
[Guest]: funding and more priority to the study of disease because you can save lives
[Guest]: whereas studying nutrition it's more like you're preventing something so it
[Guest]: definitely gets a little less or much less importance than the study or funding
[Guest]: of disease but then who funds the nutrition studies it is mostly lobbies
[Guest]: be it like the sugar lobby or the wheat growing lobby or the dairy lobby right
[Guest]: so I have I've heard about this in the US that if a certain lobby is funding a
[Guest]: study you can be like 75% sure that that study will only bring about the points
[Guest]: that are favorable to the lobby who funded them isn't that obvious because
[Guest]: there is such a conflict of interest if someone is paying me one crore to say
[Guest]: find out about this but they are themselves a sugar company how can I
[Guest]: come out and say that sugar is bad right so I think believing in such studies you
[Guest]: should also know who has funded these studies in the first place because that
[Guest]: also impacts to a great extent what the result of that study turns out to be you
[Guest]: know I think treating health is just the absence of disease and therefore not
[Guest]: giving nutrition an important role is also very what do you say it's not a
[Guest]: good thing because I think preventing is much easier it costs less and it's more
[Guest]: sustainable in the long run and you can just do it by making these small changes
[Guest]: in your day-to-day life rather than someone who has to literally flush down
[Guest]: his entire life savings to do a like a bypass surgery or undergo like a
[Guest]: dialysis every two weeks so I think we need to step back and we need to stop
[Guest]: thinking about health only when we fall sick you know in in traditional Chinese
[Guest]: medicine I had read about this thing where the emperors would pay a retainer
[Guest]: to the physicians the traditional Chinese medicine physicians and the
[Guest]: minute they fell sick they would not pay them because they are paying them to
[Guest]: keep them healthy not to treat them when they fell sick so if the Emperor or
[Guest]: their family the royal family fell sick they would not get paid for that month
[Guest]: so it's it's the reverse right and that is the importance of something like a
[Guest]: nutrition or your lifestyle where little steps matter a lot and what you can do
[Guest]: on a daily basis and that is exactly in contrast from some of these fads and the
[Guest]: camps that you were talking about where I can't think of any fad or a kind of a
[Guest]: you know a diet a diet that excludes a lot of foods a diet that deprives people
[Guest]: you can't possibly do it all your life and because there are a lot of other
[Guest]: factors that play a role in what you eat your emotional state your family your
[Guest]: socio-economic status and something like nutrition is impacted by so many factors
[Guest]: and it is not easy to just put a label and say that you do this diet and you
[Guest]: will lose you know 10 kilos of weight and that is the kind of oversimplified
[Guest]: information that is actually so much in vogue these days people just want
[Guest]: binaries are you vegan are you like meat eating is meat good is vegan good there
[Guest]: are no simple answers to this and nutrition see health itself is a
[Guest]: medicine and health is a very complicated science you're dealing with
[Guest]: the human body and every human body is different and in a space like nutrition
[Guest]: where there's even much less research and there are so many it's like in
[Guest]: mathematical terms it's like a multivariable problem where what
[Guest]: variable are you going to fix to understand what is the thing right and
[Guest]: someone may spend 20 years researching on where the maximum antioxidants are in
[Guest]: a grape and they find it that it's on the surface of the seed and you know we
[Guest]: are all eating seedless grapes these days but you find that and another one
[Guest]: year somebody else comes and says no no it's actually in the pulp so it's like
[Guest]: things like you said things change so rapidly so then are we supposed to keep
[Guest]: reading and updating ourselves on every such research paper or sometimes just
[Guest]: follow some absolute basic rules like eating whole foods eating in moderation
[Guest]: not eating too much like not stuffing yourself until you're 100% full and
[Guest]: therefore eating slowly so you realize when you're full you know eating in a
[Guest]: pleasant setup where you're eating mindfully so these are the things that
[Guest]: you can never go wrong with and no paper is going to come out tomorrow and tell
[Guest]: you that you ate a little less so you know you have created space for this
[Guest]: disease in your life that's never going to happen so why not follow the
[Guest]: principles that you know for certain are not going to change like if you if
[Guest]: someone eats one or two eggs in a day that's not going to kill them so don't
[Guest]: do anything extreme and I think the biggest problem in today's times is that
[Guest]: the more polarized you are in any field that you're more in news and the people
[Guest]: will lap up your information immediately but the minute you are very moderate and
[Guest]: you don't have that extreme bone in you you don't people say what is this so
[Guest]: boring like it being in between is the worst place to be because you'll get no
[Amit Varma]: attention but see Nandita yeah you are the kind of person on Twitter that they
[Amit Varma]: would call you a centrist when it comes to food as a pejorative but no no sorry
[Guest]: I interrupted you finish I was pretty much done yeah I think that that's what
[Guest]: I wanted to say that you know also things like gut microbe for example that
[Guest]: it's like 37 trillions of gut microbes and is it even possible that even in a
[Guest]: century we'll do enough research to understand what impact this has on our
[Guest]: body but we do know certain things for sure that you know gut microbes
[Guest]: influence your immunity because they talk to your immune system gut microbes
[Guest]: influence your mental health you know gut microbes influence a lot of
[Guest]: functions in your body which still cannot be specified or list put down in
[Guest]: a listicle but what is known is that when you eat you're literally feeding
[Guest]: your gut microbes you're not feeding yourself because whatever the stuff that
[Guest]: your body hasn't digested these are the guys that are going to digest all of
[Guest]: that and then release the byproducts which then benefits you in so many
[Guest]: different ways like head to toe it's affecting your body so to think of the
[Guest]: science is so complex and so fascinating but even by just following some very
[Guest]: basic general principles having this background knowledge but doing simple
[Guest]: things which you know for certain will have positive impact in your life I
[Amit Varma]: think that is very important yeah in fact you know people say we were
[Amit Varma]: colonized by the British no we are colonized by our gut microbes and just
[Amit Varma]: to sort of elaborate on a thought which I kind of left halfway about how the
[Amit Varma]: state caused the obesity epidemic the thing is after all these studies came
[Amit Varma]: out in the 50s and the 60s in the late 1970s the US Health Association whatever
[Amit Varma]: they are called I forget the official name came out with a series of dietary
[Amit Varma]: guidelines on what you should eat and what you should not eat and they got it
[Amit Varma]: completely wrong and if you look at the graph of America's obesity epidemic it
[Amit Varma]: kind of begins from there and of course sugar is a big problem I wasn't keto for
[Amit Varma]: a while and it really worked for me but then I kind of went off and I sort of
[Amit Varma]: went back but it worked for me except that you know in India it's kind of hard
[Amit Varma]: to keep a keto diet because you are surrounded by biryani and dosa and so on
[Amit Varma]: so what do you do and I also agree about not getting too alarmed by whatever the
[Amit Varma]: fad of the day might be like I saw the headline a few months ago saying bacon
[Amit Varma]: causes cancer and that was too much for me I was like let it cause cancer I'm
[Amit Varma]: not going to stop having bacon for God's sake and by the way you mentioned gut
[Amit Varma]: there's a lovely book I'd read a few years back called gut by Julia Enders
[Amit Varma]: which was a fascinating book on the effect of the gut on our physical and
[Amit Varma]: mental health so I'll link that from the show notes as well let's go on to your
[Amit Varma]: book because one of the early things that you write in your fine book is
[Amit Varma]: where you talk about the virtue of the diet of our grandparents like you quote
[Amit Varma]: Michael Pollan saying quote don't eat anything your great-great-great
[Amit Varma]: grandmother wouldn't recognize as food stop quote and then you have this nice
[Amit Varma]: section on what your maternal great-grandparents actually ate and why
[Amit Varma]: and what their routines were like tell me a little bit about that because that
[Guest]: was also quite instructive for me so you know Michael Pollan's that quote is
[Guest]: obviously very very very famous almost everybody has heard of it but it's also
[Guest]: a bit extreme and it's not really it's not possible to follow it 200% in
[Guest]: today's times because we're not 200 years earlier we are in 2021 and we will
[Guest]: be influenced by the things that are happening now the things that are
[Guest]: available now the way our life is now so we can't really go back in time and eat
[Guest]: what exactly they ate but I think it's worthwhile just catching the the
[Guest]: sentiment behind that statement where if you have to choose between two kinds of
[Guest]: foods there should be enough knowledge that you're choosing something that is
[Guest]: lesser processed and there is knowledge everywhere but once you keep putting
[Guest]: this into practice every single day which might feel a bit tough initially
[Guest]: but when you put this into practice every day it just becomes second nature
[Guest]: and you know that that knowledge becomes the way you deal with every little food
[Guest]: confusion that you have in your life because you know like there's this nice
[Guest]: saying which I read somewhere three times a day you get to choose what you're
[Guest]: going to put inside your body and how you're going to impact your health so
[Guest]: make it worthwhile it's very simple like say I have to choose between say you
[Guest]: know a banana and a banana bread even a kid knows that a banana is closer to the
[Guest]: way nature made it than banana bread which has added flour sugar baking
[Guest]: powder salt eggs everything right fat and it's it's cooked at a high heat so
[Guest]: it's baked just eating the banana would have been far simpler but here we are in
[Guest]: the times when we are like banana bread addition to with the pandemic you know
[Guest]: having restarted and we're all making banana bread as something like a comfort
[Guest]: food because banana as a fruit doesn't hit that spot as a comfort food it
[Guest]: doesn't have the added sugar added fats added carbs which is what qualifies to
[Guest]: make it as a comfort food and it ticks all those boxes to make us feel good so
[Guest]: there's this whole emotional aspect also like given the times we are facing now
[Guest]: we are having two kinds of behavior either there are people chugging liters
[Guest]: of cada and eating like a vitamin C going out of stock on Amazon people are
[Guest]: eating zinc and vitamin C tablets and the others are just saying chug this I'm
[Guest]: just having to stay sane in these times I'm going to eat whatever makes me
[Guest]: happy I'm not even stepping out so my weight is the last thing on my mind I
[Guest]: just need to eat something that makes me feel good and both these lines of
[Guest]: thought are right for the times that we are now you know so it's very difficult
[Guest]: to just tell people that hey these are the rules follow it and don't eat
[Guest]: unprocessed at all but we need to have a decent enough inherent knowledge of what
[Guest]: is good for us and put that into practice in our day-to-day life whenever
[Guest]: possible and not really beat ourself up for the times like these when you know
[Guest]: this is the last thing on our mind right now and we just want to we have we are
[Guest]: in that survival instinct where neither are we worried about our weight nor are
[Guest]: we worried about the impact of some chips that I'm going to eat now or I'm
[Guest]: thinking of eating it in a raw state no because even like so many people even in
[Guest]: the wellness scene world over have said that they have been eating a lot of
[Guest]: sugar they've been eating a lot of carbs in the last one year can't blame
[Guest]: ourselves for that because that's the way the times are and that's how we are
[Guest]: trying to cope with that so that is also fine but overall you should know what is
[Guest]: good for you and you know regarding yeah my great-grandparents I really found it
[Guest]: fascinating when I made that comparison between what we do and you know what
[Guest]: I've seen my great-grandparents the way they eat and even much later when there
[Guest]: was a telephone at home they would actually keep the telephone off hook
[Guest]: during lunchtime because they don't want to be disturbed by phone calls and today
[Guest]: we are actually having the mobile phone in our hand and scrolling down and
[Guest]: seeing what's going on like we we want to be disturbed right and we have gone
[Guest]: to the other extreme and sometimes they would forget to put the phone back on
[Guest]: hook even until 4 o'clock and and because they were growing old we would
[Guest]: like be you know getting mad at them like what is this they're forever
[Guest]: forgetting to put this back on hook but that was their dedication to the ritual
[Guest]: of eating even the most basic simple meal where they didn't know superfoods
[Guest]: they didn't know what they would buy what was cheap what was in season and
[Guest]: what was available in their local market and you know they all lived up to 90 and
[Guest]: touch wood like no ailments or anything so I have seen that firsthand and the
[Guest]: same with my grandparents the kind of dedication and creating a ritual around
[Guest]: eating and having a calm scenario and you know having that respectful
[Guest]: atmosphere towards your food and not just gulping it down so I read this
[Guest]: interesting thing in B Wilson's book called the way we eat where she quotes
[Guest]: this study done on 4,000 Japanese men who live in the US and they were all
[Guest]: above 30 years of age and they wanted to compare that you know even though they
[Guest]: are eating Japanese food how does their heart disease incidence etc compare with
[Guest]: the men living in Japan and eating Japanese food and even though these
[Guest]: people living in the US were eating Japanese food their heart disease rates
[Guest]: were fivefold as compared to the ones in Japan why because they didn't have that
[Guest]: slow culture they didn't have that sense of attachment towards their food setting
[Guest]: up everything nicely grab and this the whole American attitude of being rushed
[Guest]: and grab and go in a hurry and you know the impatience and urgency around food
[Guest]: versus the slower rhythms and the rituals of eating in Japan you know
[Guest]: though they were eating the same food they still showed where everything else
[Guest]: was constant they still showed fivefold increase in things like heart disease so
[Guest]: it just goes to show that how we eat is a lot lot more important than what we
[Guest]: eat and sometimes we don't even focus on what we eat so let alone how we eat
[Guest]: that's like the next step right so we need to not just understand what is it
[Guest]: that we're eating but we also need to understand how are we eating are we
[Guest]: eating mindfully and you know are we having that kind of relationship with
[Guest]: food where it's not over guilt or hate or emotions or boredom but you're eating
[Guest]: to nourish yourself and it's it's a very healthy relationship yeah there's a
[Amit Varma]: there's a lot of fascinating stuff to unpack them I mean it strikes me that in
[Amit Varma]: modern times we are really fighting of a competition between two competing
[Amit Varma]: addictions or perhaps two cooperating addictions one is to carbs and one is to
[Amit Varma]: social media which is why we are eating lots and lots of carbs while staring at
[Amit Varma]: our smartphones I mean I was in keto a couple of years back and I lost almost
[Amit Varma]: 20 kgs and felt incredibly healthy and no brain fog and so on and it was pretty
[Amit Varma]: amazing but this year I have completely you know you described the kind of
[Amit Varma]: person who's just ordering comfort food all the time so I've finished my biryani
[Amit Varma]: phase thankfully that seems to be behind me but now I'm in my pizza phase so God
[Amit Varma]: knows where this is going and definitely at my heaviest ever now a couple of sort
[Amit Varma]: of questions that emerge out of what you said and again staying on the
[Amit Varma]: grandparents seem because that seems to me to be an interesting dining table to
[Amit Varma]: use as a prism for looking at our own dining tables in in different ways and
[Amit Varma]: one of those ways is mindfulness like very often when I'm eating even if I've
[Amit Varma]: ordered something that I really love eating or you know if I've cooked
[Amit Varma]: something I love eating like I make the best bacon and egg fried rice in India
[Amit Varma]: but even when I'm having food that I love you know I'm only focused on the
[Amit Varma]: taste for maybe the first 20-30 seconds after that I'm lost in my smartphone or
[Amit Varma]: I'm reading something or maybe I'm lost in my thoughts and it's all kind of gone
[Amit Varma]: and I'm not thinking about my food at all I'm gulping it down I'm definitely
[Amit Varma]: not chewing as much as I'm supposed to chew and all of that and this is
[Amit Varma]: something that kind of baffles me that I love food you know taste matters to me
[Amit Varma]: you know I like specific things and I don't like other things but sometimes I
[Amit Varma]: will be I will have finished a meal without even having focused on it for a
[Amit Varma]: single moment you know and I'm looking back at my childhood and I'm can't
[Amit Varma]: recall what it was like were we more mindful than like I can totally
[Amit Varma]: imagine taking the phone off the hook because you want it to be an experience
[Amit Varma]: where you're interacting with your family and you don't have four people
[Amit Varma]: sitting together but at the same time sitting separately because there's a
[Amit Varma]: screen in front of them have we become less mindful of our food what do you
[Amit Varma]: remember from your personal memories and is this something that you tell yourself
[Amit Varma]: when you sit down to eat that I'm going to focus on the taste now that I'm going
[Amit Varma]: to actually do you have to force yourself to do that number one and
[Amit Varma]: number two if you were to sort of make a normative judgment on this is this bad
[Amit Varma]: is not being mindful while eating bad and if so why I just address the thing
[Guest]: you asked last first and then go back into the question see it is bad for a
[Guest]: few reasons the most obvious being that we are consuming calories or food in
[Guest]: some form and we are not enjoying that and we are not putting our mind into it
[Guest]: and at the end of it we don't even know sometimes if have we eaten it or not
[Guest]: because we have been so absent from the whole process of eating and the other
[Guest]: problem this leads to is that you know even satiety is in a way linked to this
[Guest]: so if your mind has not been in the process your body may not even realize
[Guest]: that hey I've eaten so you may end up eating again something very soon because
[Guest]: forget the digestion your mind has not digested the fact that you have eaten
[Guest]: that food and in a way one doesn't end up consuming more calories because
[Guest]: invariably when we are not focused on our eating process because it takes 20
[Guest]: minutes for the stomach to send the signal to the brain that it's full but
[Guest]: if we have finished our whole food in five minutes then where is the time to
[Guest]: understand how full or how not full are we I was doing intermittent fasting for
[Guest]: a very long time and it helped me a great deal but I had to stop because I
[Guest]: started getting like excruciating headaches and I was not I was not able
[Guest]: to do it anymore but I realized when I started fasting that how hunger feels
[Guest]: you know because we are so used to being surrounded by food all the time and
[Guest]: especially being someone who is in the food space and I'm constantly cooking
[Guest]: tasting you know and I've never been religious so I have never done a
[Guest]: religious fast in my life and this is what I felt okay this is how hunger
[Guest]: feels like and just to experience hunger was like a miracle because we you know
[Guest]: in our privileged setup we never experience hunger before we feel hungry
[Guest]: we've already eaten something right and very rarely if we've gone out especially
[Guest]: in Bangalore scenario and you got stuck in traffic for two hours and then you
[Guest]: come back home really hungry but that's like a forced situation you've never
[Guest]: done it voluntarily so I think just experiencing what hunger feels like
[Guest]: experiencing what full feels like we don't unless we pay attention to our
[Guest]: body you're not going to even know this and even though I've written a book
[Guest]: about this it's a constant struggle you know sometimes even before I sit down to
[Guest]: eat I think what am I going to watch with this today you know because my
[Guest]: eating time is sometimes my only free time in the day and I have other
[Guest]: deadlines lined up and things to do so I feel this is the only time I can give
[Guest]: myself a break and watch something but why don't I treat the food itself as a
[Guest]: break why do I need an additional crutch to add on to this break right and this
[Guest]: is interesting thing last December November I started watching these Korean
[Guest]: YouTube vloggers I'm not talking about Kdrama I haven't started watching that
[Guest]: yet despite too much pressure on Twitter I see that everywhere you know I was
[Guest]: fascinated by the way they lead their lives and these are not just Koreans in
[Guest]: Korea but also the ones who live in US and other places and trust me it was
[Guest]: like a rabbit hole and I could never come out of it it was so fascinating and
[Guest]: riveting how slow how meaningful how mindful they lead their life and I'm not
[Guest]: saying because somebody on YouTube just posted a vlog about that and that's how
[Guest]: they all are but it does give me the impression that they definitely stick to
[Guest]: these traditions they take this very seriously they believe in cooking
[Guest]: everything from scratch and even their children and the next generation loves
[Guest]: Korean traditional food and no matter because their food also has quite
[Guest]: different kinds of sometimes bitter they even use things like karela in their
[Guest]: cooking and you know the kids eat everything and they all sit together at
[Guest]: the table and this is one scene which I won't forget there's this and they also
[Guest]: show a lot of cleaning in their videos they're obsessed with keeping their
[Guest]: house spotlessly clean and I watched that while saying that my own room is
[Guest]: dirty but I'm watching that and you know after cleaning the bathroom and
[Guest]: everything scrubbing the whole house clean she'll come to her balcony and
[Guest]: make herself a like a small pot of some beautiful tea and in a small plate some
[Guest]: two pieces of cake and cookie and she'll keep it on her table on the balcony no
[Guest]: no gadgets no books nothing around and she will slowly be sipping that and
[Guest]: eating that while one cat is purring around so this is the classic scene and
[Guest]: it made me feel like I want that life and I want to be in that mental state
[Guest]: where you know I finish all the housework and I take this break with a
[Guest]: cup of tea and a cake which I eat and drink absolutely guilt-free and I feel
[Guest]: like I have earned this and putting my whole mind and all my five senses into
[Guest]: this experience and how can that cake make you gain weight because it has
[Guest]: already released so much of happy hormones the good kind of hormones instead of the
[Guest]: stressful cortisol that actually makes you accumulate the belly fat and all
[Guest]: that so I feel like this is why how you eat is so important imagine just going
[Guest]: through a drive-thru like in a country where there's a drive-thru and buying
[Guest]: some of these you know cakes or some milkshakes or something and drinking in
[Guest]: the car and going away that is so American but you know when you see this
[Guest]: stark difference in Korea and their culture you know there's so much to
[Guest]: learn from that I'm sure Indians were also like that but these guys just make
[Guest]: the most aesthetic and pleasing videos that make you aspire to that kind of
[Amit Varma]: life. In fact this is another cinematic moment like I can think of you know if a
[Amit Varma]: film of your life would begin with you know Eli Roth or Louis Bunuel perhaps
[Amit Varma]: directing that scene where the skull is being cut open and they're singing
[Amit Varma]: happy birthday it could end with you know Ozu directing the last scene of the
[Amit Varma]: closing credits where you're in the balcony with a little cup of tea and one
[Amit Varma]: little biscuit and there's just peace and quiet and focus so suddenly you know
[Amit Varma]: a full journey we have kind of traveled here those who of course were Japanese
[Amit Varma]: and not Korean but you know similar feels as it were. The other aspect of
[Amit Varma]: you know what you describe about your great-grandparents table is
[Amit Varma]: something that almost seems to me to become a virtue out of necessity like
[Amit Varma]: you point out that they eat food which is local seasonal cheap they don't cook
[Amit Varma]: more than they are going to eat at a particular meal but that flows from
[Amit Varma]: necessity because there are no fridges so they can't store food there are no
[Amit Varma]: fridges the world is not so interconnected that food can come from
[Amit Varma]: wherever so out of necessity you are eating local seasonal and cheap and that
[Amit Varma]: becomes a virtue. Now you know going back to what Pauline said and of course
[Amit Varma]: Pauline didn't literally mean that you have to eat what your great great great
[Amit Varma]: great grandmother ate. Two conflicting thoughts come up here for me and one
[Amit Varma]: thought of course is the classic conservative thought that if there is a
[Amit Varma]: particular diet that has evolved over a period of time if your grandmother said
[Amit Varma]: this is healthy eat this there's a reason it has evolved because it works
[Amit Varma]: for you and sometimes our traditions have sort of deeper reasonings behind
[Amit Varma]: them which might not necessarily be a reasoning that was scientific to begin
[Amit Varma]: with but just comes from the practice through generations and so on and there
[Amit Varma]: is much value and merit in that. At the same time it strikes me that our great
[Amit Varma]: great grandparents didn't have access to either a lot of the food or the
[Amit Varma]: knowledge that we do like we are surrounded by so many different kinds of
[Amit Varma]: foods today that our grandparents would not have known and and the question then
[Amit Varma]: comes up is that you know how how does one evolve a set of values around what
[Amit Varma]: one is to eat like when you think of your own eating for example so there is
[Amit Varma]: a certain kind of food that you like eating that because you've grown up
[Amit Varma]: eating that and you acquire tastes along the way but at some point in time you've
[Amit Varma]: clearly thought and said that this is the kind of food that I want to eat and
[Amit Varma]: this is my philosophy behind this kind of food this is why I want to eat this
[Amit Varma]: kind of food and at the same time of course I do want it to be tasty as well
[Amit Varma]: so it is not only you know this thing. How did you evolve your way of thinking
[Amit Varma]: about food and where would you say it has kind of arrived today. I've been a
[Guest]: vegetarian since I was born I was born in a vegetarian family and of course I
[Guest]: ate eggs and that was the limit of my you know dietary habits. See currently
[Guest]: like you said I'm always grown up eating Tamil food South Indian food there was
[Guest]: not like much experimentation happening my one of my aunts was like keen on
[Guest]: trying out new things and she would like cut things from magazines and try them
[Guest]: out and I was like a willing taster for everything so that exposed me a little
[Guest]: bit outside of our very traditional food but growing up that was it and you know
[Guest]: we were not like the very restaurant visiting family either because one very
[Guest]: middle-class and money had to be saved for more important things and also you
[Guest]: know we had like a couple of restaurants in the Dadar, Sayan area where we would
[Guest]: love the food and we'd go like once in few months as a treat and I just would
[Guest]: order the same thing you know in these places and that was my food world and
[Guest]: it's not like we had like too much of a social circle of friends or eating at
[Guest]: other people's houses so I was not even exposed much to other Indian cuisines
[Guest]: let alone much of foreign cuisines but today as you say there's been such an
[Guest]: explosion in the last decade or so from things like food shows, cookbooks,
[Guest]: magazines, YouTube and you know on the web so much of content and even stuff
[Guest]: that's available like at the click of a button on Amazon you can order anything
[Guest]: right from gochugaru to a smoked paprika to you name it you will get it
[Guest]: instantly so availability is there all the kind of creative ideas are there and
[Guest]: if you are interested in trying out these new things and of course there's
[Guest]: whole bunch of restaurants and delivery services so it is so much stimulation
[Guest]: available for you to choose from so it becomes increasingly difficult what the
[Guest]: hell do I eat you know sometimes you know I tell my husband I'm not going to
[Guest]: cook today I'm very bored and you say okay let's order and then we figure out
[Guest]: for half an hour, one hour what to order and I said I would have just finished
[Guest]: cooking in this much time you know so it's just like what to order and what to
[Guest]: eat is like you just tear your hair over that and it's sometimes more painful
[Guest]: than the cooking process itself so how do you even choose what to cook and
[Guest]: sometimes sometimes I go about the way of a menu plan where I tell myself also
[Guest]: in some sometimes I'm in the middle of some recipe testing for my books or my
[Guest]: column etc so I will write down that I want to make these things in the week
[Guest]: and sometimes something catches my fancy online and I say okay I wish I could try
[Guest]: that out and I will make a note of that but then you know some I just go back to
[Guest]: sambar rice and sabzi because I don't want to think about what to make and I
[Guest]: don't have to you know read my whole kitchen which ingredient is where this
[Guest]: that and just keep it very simple and I think five days a week I just keep it
[Guest]: very very simple because I think like Steve Jobs who just knew what to wear in
[Guest]: the morning every day I just feel more comfortable knowing what am I going to
[Guest]: cook every day I don't want to be raking my head in the morning what's for lunch
[Guest]: what's for dinner so I think one is a comfort of going back to tradition and
[Guest]: two not having the hassle of thinking too much about what so within the
[Guest]: spectrum how can I eat healthy maybe one day I will eat millets and I'll have
[Guest]: some kind of raw salad along with my meal and I in the vegetable it will be
[Guest]: something seasonal and you know am I having something fermented like dahi or
[Guest]: some pickle with this so within the construct of my traditional food I just
[Guest]: figure out what is available what is the best see also even cooking is a process
[Guest]: of choosing from the best ingredients and making something nice out of it and
[Guest]: in this case by best I mean what is the healthiest and best for you for your
[Guest]: health and if I could choose from ten different things okay I want to put this
[Guest]: this this together in my plate today but I know what I'm going to make if it's
[Guest]: just like a sambar or a rasam or a curry I just know have to apply that into this
[Guest]: that process just makes it simpler when you are the one cooking because I have
[Guest]: seen friends and people who you know they are outside and their cook calls
[Guest]: them from out ki madam kya banao and they just say kuch bhi banao because they
[Guest]: one they've outsourced the whole cooking process outsource the buying of the
[Guest]: grocery and stuff now you're also outsourcing the process of deciding what
[Guest]: you are going to eat the person who's cooking for you I find that most
[Guest]: fascinating amusing and also like boss why are you giving away your health in
[Guest]: your cooks hands like you can't even decide what you want to eat you know
[Guest]: because even that process is so tough telling the cook what to cook no it's
[Amit Varma]: it's all fascinating and you mentioned Steve Jobs and obviously the reason
[Amit Varma]: Jobs used to kind of wear the same clothes every day like not literally the
[Amit Varma]: same clothes clothes but you know that the same kind of uniform as it were the
[Amit Varma]: black turtleneck shirt and the jeans was to avoid what cognitive psychologists
[Amit Varma]: call decision fatigue because every decision you take through a day tires
[Amit Varma]: you out and you want to save as much energy as possible and one way of jobs
[Amit Varma]: was that he doesn't have to decide what he's going to wear so it's the same
[Amit Varma]: thing every day and equally in your first book which is the everyday healthy
[Amit Varma]: vegetarian which you wrote in 2017 for Hachette you spoke about I think the
[Amit Varma]: importance of menu preparation of deciding in advance what you're going to
[Amit Varma]: eat through the week and all of that and that kind of brings me to my next
[Amit Varma]: question now one reason for doing that would obviously be to save yourself from
[Amit Varma]: decision fatigue so rather than tire yourself out by thinking what you're
[Amit Varma]: going to eat you can decide a menu for the week in advance and just go with
[Amit Varma]: that but the other aspect of that is that what you're really doing there it
[Amit Varma]: seems to me is setting out a process for yourself like one of my favorite self
[Amit Varma]: help books of modern times is James Clear's atomic habits where he talks
[Amit Varma]: about how it's more important to have processes and goals that everybody can
[Amit Varma]: have great goals but the only people who achieve those goals are the people who
[Amit Varma]: have great processes and it strikes me that you know when one is eating it's
[Amit Varma]: you know more important to just build healthy eating habits over a time
[Amit Varma]: through certain processes rather than set yourself a target like you know I
[Amit Varma]: will eat so many calories every day or I will lose so much weight by this period
[Amit Varma]: of time and all of that and those goals can get counterproductive and the goals
[Amit Varma]: alone can stress you out whereas if you just internalize a self-image of
[Amit Varma]: yourself like I am a person who eats healthy I am a person who eats at
[Amit Varma]: particular times and that's another thing you mentioned about your
[Amit Varma]: grandparents that they ate at these fixed particular times during the day so
[Amit Varma]: like one I guess it's a two-step process one you build a prism through which you
[Amit Varma]: look at food which you built in which you've kind of outlined in your book as
[Amit Varma]: well and we'll talk a little more about that now but and then once you build that
[Amit Varma]: prism you use it to build processes and then everything takes care of itself is
[Amit Varma]: that an accurate description is that how you've sort of approached it yeah you're
[Guest]: right because see healthy eating more than anything else it is the planning
[Guest]: that counts because I may have all the good intentions but when I open my fridge
[Guest]: and the first thing I see is like a desert in front of me and if I'm hungry
[Guest]: I am going to reach out for that I mean it's it's not willpower or anything it's
[Guest]: just that it's there so what you see is what you eat if I had planned a little
[Guest]: bit better and if I had kept things like a hummus or some vegetables or some you
[Guest]: know fruits which are cut and ready in transparent containers when I open the
[Guest]: fridge that is what I see so that is the planning that you know telling yourself
[Guest]: what are you going to eat like even when they tell people to visualize your
[Guest]: success right like you imagine yourself going and doing all that so this kind of
[Guest]: planning is that I'm only telling myself tomorrow I'm going to eat this this this
[Guest]: and you know if we have told ourselves that that plan is already in place so
[Guest]: when I get hungry I don't have to think about what am I going to eat now because
[Guest]: when you're hungry most likely the decision you take will not be a correct
[Guest]: decision anyway so for those times is when which is why they also say that you
[Guest]: never go for food shopping when you're hungry always go after you've had your
[Guest]: lunch and because that definitely impacts the way you think and the choices
[Guest]: you make so having a plan in place is the first step towards any kind of
[Guest]: healthy eating even if you're going to order out you tell yourself that these
[Guest]: are the restaurants this these are the dishes and keep a list of them and you
[Guest]: know that of all the other choices these may be better so I'm going to order from
[Guest]: these so and that's how you can even be prepared stock up for these things and
[Guest]: have all the things you need for a certain meal or something already
[Guest]: because then it's so tough if you want you have the intention you want to eat
[Guest]: something healthy but there is nothing available and when you open your fridge
[Guest]: the only things that you see are things that are not good for you then how is it
[Guest]: going to help you stick to your plan it's going to be so difficult so I try
[Guest]: to follow that and of course all this planning and prepping it does take so
[Guest]: much time and effort and it is tough I'm not saying no but if you keep doing this
[Guest]: it kind of becomes a second habit like when you order your groceries you also
[Guest]: order a few couple of fruits or you know something like that so yeah so that
[Guest]: that's that's a simple way to go about this the planning and processes and
[Amit Varma]: being well prepared no and I guess there are ways to even outsource little bits
[Amit Varma]: of that like when I was in Quito I realized that there are these services
[Unknown]: in you know Mumbai and I'm sure even Bangalore who'll provide you four keto
[Amit Varma]: meals a day so you don't actually even have to think about it or there are apps
[Amit Varma]: where which will calculate the calories of everything and tell you what you
[Amit Varma]: should have next to meet your macros and all of that my next question is kind of
[Amit Varma]: about a theme that I've thought a bit about but I've only sort of while
[Amit Varma]: chatting with you it struck me that it applies to food as well which is about
[Amit Varma]: how you know along with the great technological advances we have had in
[Amit Varma]: these times all of which are a blessing to us and have made our lives so much
[Amit Varma]: better and which in fact are enabling this conversation there are also some
[Amit Varma]: that have a flip side and the flip side is that there is a lot of technology
[Amit Varma]: today for manipulation of the brain for example in the context of social media
[Amit Varma]: everything becomes much more addictive that people have sort of figured out and
[Amit Varma]: in my years as a professional gambler I kind of read up a lot on how casinos do
[Amit Varma]: this also how the lights and the sounds and all of that will ensure that you
[Amit Varma]: keep chasing the next dopamine rush and similarly you know social media also
[Amit Varma]: does that it's meant to keep keep you on that dopamine like you know one of the
[Amit Varma]: things that some of the apps did a few years ago I think they all probably do
[Amit Varma]: it now is that if you press the back button you wouldn't go back the screen
[Amit Varma]: would refresh so you'd have more stories so you simply can't get away you're
[Amit Varma]: kind of trapped and it strikes me that this also happens in the context of food
[Amit Varma]: where our brain is drawn towards sweet food there are certain kind of foods
[Amit Varma]: that we get addicted to like I really think that carbs in a sense are an
[Amit Varma]: addiction this is an addiction that processed foods take advantage of they
[Amit Varma]: are not just designed to be tasty or and they're not just designed to have some
[Amit Varma]: nutrition as and when they do but they are designed to be addictive in fact
[Amit Varma]: that is a fundamental you know design imperative of processed food because
[Amit Varma]: whoever's making them wants you to go out and buy them again and again and
[Amit Varma]: again and this also makes them incredibly unhealthy and this is
[Amit Varma]: something that you've also you know spoken about in your book so tell me a
[Amit Varma]: little bit about processed foods and what can we do to fight them because a
[Amit Varma]: lot of processed foods are common everyday foods like white sugar or
[Amit Varma]: tomato ketchup you know how should we reduce the kind of processed foods we
[Amit Varma]: take are there any processed foods which are actually okay and you know what is
[Guest]: your approach to all of this see the processed food industry I'm sure they
[Guest]: spend millions or billions of dollars on just the science of creating an
[Guest]: addictive combination in matters of flavor so people just it's like that you
[Guest]: can't eat just one tagline of Lay's right and that's how they are designed
[Guest]: to be and recently I was reading up on this thing about comfort foods right the
[Guest]: kind of foods that we reach out to when we are feeling low and we want to feel
[Guest]: better etc and invariably a comfort food anywhere in the world will be a
[Guest]: combination of sugar fat and carbs in some way and either one or two or all
[Guest]: three of these it goes back to when we were babies you know when we were
[Guest]: agitated or when we would cry when we would be hungry mothers would feed us
[Guest]: breast milk or any milk bottled milk and that milk had the same combination of
[Guest]: sugars fats and carbs that would instantly soothe us and babies either go
[Guest]: to sleep or they stop crying right so that same thing has continued as a part
[Guest]: of our evolution all into our adulthood there that same combination of food no
[Guest]: matter what the end result may not be milk at all it may be chips or it may be
[Guest]: a desert or it may be pasta or whatever it is that same combination of compounds
[Guest]: triggers off that same dopamine kind of scenario in our brain where we feel
[Guest]: soothed and comforted and the way we would feel as babies so it is something
[Guest]: as basic as that and no matter what diet somebody's on they cannot be not
[Guest]: comforted with these kind of foods and that's why it becomes all the more a big
[Guest]: struggle to you know avoid these things in my life I mean not anyone's life and
[Guest]: you know I often tell people that if I have to give up rice then I might as
[Guest]: well give up living because what am I going to do with my life if you tell me
[Guest]: I can't eat rice ever so I think this this is definitely one aspect of it and
[Guest]: the processed food industry takes maximum advantage of the fact that these
[Guest]: three compounds you given any combination plus with the added flavor
[Guest]: molecules which they have done so much worth of research on they know that
[Guest]: people are going to be hooked to this product and in my book I have written
[Guest]: about the very basic cornflakes or the cereal that a lot of Indians have moved
[Guest]: towards eating that for breakfast because you just remove it from a box
[Guest]: and you add some milk and you add some fruit and you think it's healthy but
[Guest]: compare a cornflakes to a Bhutta or the full the corn on the cob that we see in
[Guest]: the monsoons and now pretty much see around the year so that is the real food
[Guest]: at least close to real because even that must have gone through some chemical
[Guest]: processes and whatever but each of those corn kernels the ectosperm or the skin
[Guest]: is peeled off then it is cooked then it is dried and then it is roasted and then
[Guest]: it is a flattened and then it is packaged and in the middle of these
[Guest]: processes you get all the additives of sugar salt flavorings all the artificial
[Guest]: strawberry fruit flavor or the chocolate flavor and of course preservatives so
[Guest]: that you can buy it and keep it even for one year nothing will go wrong try to
[Guest]: keep like a corn on the cob for one year in your fridge and see what happens
[Guest]: right so we don't even realize we think how I ate cornflakes this is called a
[Guest]: healthy brand of cornflakes and I've had it with milk and fruit and honey all of
[Guest]: it is very healthy so we feel happy that we've eaten something healthy but if we
[Guest]: give a little thought as to what process has gone behind you know from its
[Guest]: natural form to the form that you see it in front of you what are all the
[Guest]: processes that have gone into it and it could all have been avoided if you chose
[Guest]: something as simple as a poha which is just rice which has been flattened so
[Guest]: the number of processes have been so less and then you make it in whatever
[Guest]: way you want right so even like in the Bengalis they just have that with milk
[Guest]: the poha right and some sugar so even that is much less process than eating
[Guest]: your processed cereal so I think the first step is definitely awareness and
[Guest]: again that question of mindfulness comes in because if I'm in a hurry I'm just
[Guest]: shaking that box of cereal into my bowl and adding milk and eating it on the go
[Guest]: where am I going to spend a minute thinking about what how did this
[Guest]: cornflakes come across and how did it become like this what is there in it
[Guest]: have I read the nutritional label do I know what ingredients these are do they
[Guest]: even sound like food so you know and like I said initially it may be a bit
[Guest]: tiresome because we are surrounded by things like this and I don't say it is
[Guest]: easy at all to think about everything that we put in our mouth then we say I'd
[Guest]: rather be fasting because this is too complicated but I think having this
[Guest]: basic knowledge about at least the 10-15 things that you eat on a regular basis
[Guest]: and translating that knowledge into a second nature by which you just know
[Guest]: what is good you don't and I think human beings as a race we have been innately
[Guest]: using food as medicine we know what is good for us in the hunter-gatherer thing
[Guest]: they didn't have any barcode or app to tell them what is this how many calories
[Guest]: is this and stuff they just knew and I think over the last thousands of years
[Guest]: we have moved away so much from our inherent knowledge and trusting our own
[Guest]: instincts that for everything we have to either Google or understand what is
[Guest]: happening so I think as humans we have lost the we have lost the knowledge or
[Guest]: that inherent knowledge of what foods are good for us what we should go for
[Guest]: and I think we have distanced ourselves so much and a lot of industries lobbies
[Guest]: and all they are also responsible for that but we are also responsible in a
[Guest]: way that we have not been so careful we just think okay it's something I'm going
[Guest]: to eat it you don't realize that there is something external which you're
[Guest]: putting into your body which is going to become part of your body in the next 24
[Guest]: hours and you don't give it that much importance so I think understanding food
[Guest]: is more important than just trusting these YouTube videos or these Instagram
[Guest]: posts with millions of views where they just say this is good this is bad very
[Guest]: binary very yes and no kind of answers which is very easy for people because it
[Guest]: saves their time and their effort but do these people even know your body do they
[Guest]: know your lifestyle your culture because it is it is never a yes and no it's
[Guest]: never a binary it is so complicated and it is so personalized and it differs
[Guest]: from person to person so how can you just believe something that gives you
[Guest]: such an oversimplified information just because you don't want to spend time and
[Guest]: invest that time into your own health by understanding what you should eat
[Guest]: because you are the only person who knows what is best for you yeah and it
[Amit Varma]: strikes me that you know earlier we spoke of decision fatigue and Steve
[Amit Varma]: Jobs and all of that and one of the ways people deal with decision fatigue is
[Amit Varma]: something called satisficing which is a combination of satisfying and sufficing
[Amit Varma]: where you're satisfied with something that suffices and a lot of people do
[Amit Varma]: satisficing when it comes to their diet and that makes no sense because it's a
[Amit Varma]: question of what you're putting inside your own body it is shaping the
[Amit Varma]: well-being of your future self why on earth would you want to satisfy with
[Amit Varma]: that you can satisfy say if you're going out to buy a new shirt or a toaster or
[Amit Varma]: whatever but when it comes to the food that you're putting inside your own body
[Amit Varma]: you you should not be absent-minded you should not go with the flow or you
[Amit Varma]: should not follow like you said what an influencer might say on Instagram or
[Amit Varma]: YouTube unless that influencer is around the third year and instead sort of think
[Amit Varma]: a little harder for yourself by the way I'm half Bengali but despite that I like
[Amit Varma]: the thought of neither poha nor milk nor sugar so that was for a moment I was a
[Amit Varma]: ghastly thought of a combination now I am reminded by something you said of
[Amit Varma]: this great book called behave by Robert Sapolsky and and you know the listeners
[Amit Varma]: who will hark back to the first commercial of this episode will realize
[Amit Varma]: that I've recommended a course by Sapolsky which is on the great courses
[Amit Varma]: plus who are the sponsors of this fine episode so do check them out but
[Amit Varma]: Sapolsky's written this great book called behave and what he does in behave
[Amit Varma]: is really interesting where he'll take an action and then he'll explain the
[Amit Varma]: proximate reason for it and then he'll go a little further back in time and
[Amit Varma]: explain a deeper reason for it which goes further back and he'll go all the
[Amit Varma]: way back to how we are wired in prehistoric times and in a similar sense
[Amit Varma]: I think when it comes for our addiction to packaged food you can go far back
[Amit Varma]: like you went as far as a baby having the mother's milk but you know really I
[Amit Varma]: think one has to go back to prehistoric times where the you know when our brains
[Amit Varma]: were wired by natural selection and the fact of the matter is you didn't know
[Amit Varma]: where your next meal was coming from you didn't know when you're going to you
[Amit Varma]: know get you know kill the next deer as it were or managed to find suitable food
[Amit Varma]: growing somewhere and and therefore whoever had the instinct to take in as
[Amit Varma]: many calories as it possibly can would be more likely to survive and therefore
[Amit Varma]: more likely to propagate and therefore those genes kind of go forward into the
[Amit Varma]: world which is why it's so hard for some of us to stop eating that you know we
[Amit Varma]: might be full even after the stomach sends a signal to the brain that hey
[Amit Varma]: you're full 20 minutes have passed you're full you were full 20 minutes ago
[Amit Varma]: chill out and stop but still you'll continue you know who can stop at one
[Amit Varma]: like in many ways we need to fight our own hardwiring and this seems to be to
[Amit Varma]: be one of the ways let's let's talk about your book now before the entire
[Amit Varma]: sort of conversation gets over and Nandita I hear fanboys and fangirls tell
[Amit Varma]: me that you spoke to her for three hours and you didn't even ask her what are
[Amit Varma]: superfoods so I can't do that obviously what was the impetus behind writing this
[Amit Varma]: specific book and what are superfoods so the impetus behind writing the book is
[Guest]: something we already discussed that in the space of food and nutrition the
[Guest]: misinformation is in abundance and oversimplified information and you know
[Guest]: trying to dumb down things to a level where they're no longer even true and it
[Guest]: would annoy me a great deal and you know the typically how these algorithms on
[Guest]: social media and the internet work is that if people have watched this YouTube
[Guest]: video a few million times and no matter what you search for it will come up as
[Guest]: the most watched recommendation right so that misinformation cycle is just going
[Guest]: on faster and faster and you know things like you know drink this tea and lose
[Guest]: weight in 20 20 kilos and there's so many such videos it's not funny and you
[Guest]: know I'm not saying that someone who does not have a health or medical
[Guest]: background cannot understand nutrition but it does help in understanding it at
[Guest]: a deeper level or understanding when you read certain studies journals papers you
[Guest]: understand the language you understand what they are trying to convey and you
[Guest]: understand what is verified versus just some you know legend going around the
[Guest]: internet so you learn to differentiate good from bad and it really helps so when
[Guest]: people who have absolutely no background purely because of internet fame and
[Guest]: stuff and algorithms they just call themselves experts and continue
[Guest]: spreading misinformation it used to like trouble me a lot and I said okay I am
[Guest]: why not write something that speaks of moderation and not just in binaries and
[Guest]: trying to explain the complexity behind the science and also in a way provide
[Guest]: the knowledge to people and readers so they can take their own decisions and
[Guest]: create their own diet plans create their own menus and I don't want to force feed
[Guest]: anything to people that is not a part of their culture that is they cannot
[Guest]: sustain for their whole life and this was just this was the whole thinking
[Guest]: behind the book is to create like a step-by-step hand-holding kind of
[Guest]: approach where people understand that it's not straight jumping to a recipe or
[Guest]: a diet but first you need to understand what is your relationship with food how
[Guest]: can you improve your relationship with food then what are the ways in which you
[Guest]: know that how we eat aspect of things versus you know what are we eating and
[Guest]: then talking about how certain superfoods are good for certain
[Guest]: conditions so while you may eat everything these things may benefit you
[Guest]: more I chose 39 superfoods to be a part of this using the criteria of are they
[Guest]: local are they easily available are they fairly inexpensive and is it processed
[Guest]: or unprocessed like I won't count orange juice as a superfood so using these
[Guest]: criteria I chose these but this is just a very small introduction of course
[Guest]: through this people will also understand that other similar you know if red grapes
[Guest]: is good even green grapes are good and they can build their own list and when
[Guest]: they cook or they eat why not pick things which are already so rich in
[Guest]: nutrients that finally the dish that you cook will be very nutritious for you
[Guest]: rather than choose lesser nutritious ingredients which are not giving that
[Guest]: much nutrient per calorie so it is calorie rich but nutrient poor so why
[Guest]: not when you're cooking something make the most of the food that is easily
[Guest]: available to us and and then coming down to describing each of these ingredients
[Guest]: a little bit of history and the different ways again anything that you
[Guest]: call a superfood and you want to eat more of it throughout your life it has
[Guest]: to be a versatile ingredient it can't be just used in one particular dish in a
[Guest]: small quantity and then you're not going to get enough benefit out of it so
[Guest]: things like say a green moong or a pumpkin they are so versatile you can
[Guest]: cook it in hundred different ways and still come up with newer ways so talking
[Guest]: about the different ways in which people can include this in their diet in simple
[Guest]: ways and then coming up with things like meal prep because like we said planning
[Guest]: is everything when it comes to healthy eating and if you have meal prep these
[Guest]: five six different things and it's in your fridge it's so easy to put together
[Guest]: a salad if you've already cooked some rajma or chana and you have some millet
[Guest]: and then you add that and then you have some shelled pomegranate you add that so
[Guest]: you and some just lime juice and some olive oil and you have a hearty salad
[Guest]: ready like less than five minutes you don't have to do anything more than that
[Guest]: like more than the time it takes you to decide what to order on Swiggy this is
[Guest]: ready so that's the next chapter and then I am definitely concerned about
[Guest]: things like sustainability especially in the superfood context because people
[Guest]: tend to go crazy over one particular ingredient and that leads to a lot of
[Guest]: things like monocropping and people only focusing on growth farmers focusing on
[Guest]: growing that one thing because that's giving them more returns so which is why
[Guest]: people have to be eating more biodiverse produce not because it gives you more
[Guest]: variety of nutrients but also because it's good for the earth you don't want
[Guest]: to go back to a situation where turmeric is good for you so there's an
[Guest]: industrialized farming of turmeric with heavy use of pesticides and fertilizers
[Guest]: then what good is that turmeric to you so you have to make sure that you have
[Guest]: to know how it is grown and to make sure that it is grown in a more gentler
[Guest]: manner treating the earth more gently you need to make sure that you're not
[Guest]: running after only one ingredient because that will force the whole
[Guest]: ecosystem to change and produce more of just that so and also all other aspects
[Guest]: like what cookware are you using because that's another having been in the
[Guest]: blogging space for more than 15 years I have a sense of the problems that people
[Guest]: face and the kind of confusions they have in choosing because earlier we had
[Guest]: not much choice in our grandparents time but now there's so much choice and is
[Guest]: nonstick good is aluminum good is you know stoneware good cast iron is good
[Guest]: it's so heavy how am I going to use it it gets rusted so many questions I've
[Guest]: tried to simplify that as well and also talk about certain very simple
[Guest]: sustainable techniques that you can use in your day-to-day life in your kitchen
[Guest]: without spending too much but also making sure you have chosen something
[Guest]: that's better for the environment in the long run because it's not good to only
[Guest]: think of our human body and think of our health but then damage the planet's
[Guest]: health and so in a nutshell this is all that my book covers yeah and and to sort
[Amit Varma]: of summarize one of your points with apologies to non Hindi speakers if we
[Amit Varma]: don't treat the earth well anarth ho jayega so sorry for that I had to get away with one of these
[Amit Varma]: know what I kind of loved about your book and why I would you know
[Amit Varma]: recommended everybody actually own a copy don't just buy it on Kindle but get
[Amit Varma]: the physical copy if you can as well and keep it with you and why it's almost a
[Amit Varma]: collector's item is that it combines two things that I think you know are
[Amit Varma]: difficult to find together one is that it is conceptually clear you know it's
[Amit Varma]: simple language you know I get it all in fact your first couple of chapters
[Amit Varma]: especially where you deal with people's relationship with food and how you need
[Amit Varma]: to reset that the importance of you know mindfulness and the importance of
[Amit Varma]: thinking about where your food comes from what it contains all of that I
[Amit Varma]: found it enormously useful and and that brings me to the second aspect of what I
[Amit Varma]: really like about your book is that it is bloody useful you know you're not
[Amit Varma]: just telling me what are the superfoods and why this is a superfood have this
[Amit Varma]: but you're also giving useful tips on how to integrate it into our everyday
[Amit Varma]: sort of cooking and all of that though how I will incorporate amla into my
[Amit Varma]: bacon and egg fried rice I have still to figure out but maybe we can have an
[Amit Varma]: offline discussion about that but I found it incredibly useful tons of
[Amit Varma]: recipes tons of you know guidance at a conceptual level that you know X
[Amit Varma]: ingredient is great because of these reasons and hey here's what you can do
[Amit Varma]: to you know put it into your diet so I am for that reason I found it kind of an
[Amit Varma]: important book if you care about what you're putting into your body then
[Amit Varma]: please buy everyday superfoods by none that are here so I have a handful of
[Amit Varma]: questions before I let you go not that you're a prisoner I'm saying before I
[Amit Varma]: let you go but you know what I mean and one of them is about social media one of
[Amit Varma]: the things that you've done extremely well is that you've built without
[Amit Varma]: thinking of yourself as a brand because I realized that over a period of time by
[Amit Varma]: doing all these different things people talk about how I built my brand and I
[Amit Varma]: never thought of it like that but you you're just true to yourself and you do
[Amit Varma]: a bunch of different things and it kind of works out that way now you started of
[Amit Varma]: blogging with saffron trail which you know became very I mean that it was the
[Amit Varma]: only food blog I think I actually knew of back in the day though I must confess
[Amit Varma]: that I wasn't much into cooking so it wasn't like I was taking recipes of it
[Amit Varma]: on a daily basis or such like but you started off by blogging and from there
[Amit Varma]: you then moved on to you know to Instagram to Facebook to Twitter and
[Amit Varma]: you're doing interesting things on all of them like you know you had a tweet
[Amit Varma]: and I'll ask you more about that on the kind of food that one should eat during
[Amit Varma]: these covid times and your Twitter thread took a very separate approach to
[Amit Varma]: it and on Instagram you took a very different approach to it so you've got
[Amit Varma]: the same content but you're packaging it very differently so how did these
[Amit Varma]: different medium shape your content as you went along and as it shaped your
[Amit Varma]: content did it also change the way you started thinking about food or writing
[Amit Varma]: about food and and were there aspects of it which you had to learn from scratch
[Amit Varma]: like the importance of the visual for example like in actual food will today's
[Amit Varma]: masterchef inspired kids will keep talking about the importance of plating
[Amit Varma]: and how you eat through the eyes and all of that and on Instagram it strikes me
[Amit Varma]: that you know it could be a photography blog where the photographer has just
[Amit Varma]: happened to choose food because those are very enticing and beautiful pictures
[Amit Varma]: as well what was that process like where you get into each of these forms and you
[Amit Varma]: start figuring out what to do in this form to express yourself so to say
[Guest]: actually I don't think I have planned or thought much and I should have a little
[Guest]: bit more because I joined Instagram the day it was launched when it was launched
[Guest]: only for iPhone users and by now I should be having at least a million
[Guest]: followers but I have like some 70,000 followers that is because I don't really
[Guest]: follow a plan or I don't have a schedule and I post what I cook I mean I don't
[Guest]: cook to post something great and I post what I eat because if I had to do too
[Guest]: much planning and there are so many platforms and there's something new
[Guest]: coming on all the time and I'm social media is not my main thing it just helps
[Guest]: like I tell friends I would have happily deleted Facebook and Instagram not
[Guest]: Twitter if you know I wasn't in the space because it's it's required to
[Guest]: showcase your brand and yourself to this whole audience and you lose out on that
[Guest]: if you're not on these platforms so I just use it as something that's
[Guest]: essential I really don't have that time or bandwidth to create content
[Guest]: especially do things for Instagram alone although I do especially in the context
[Guest]: of my new book I have been thinking of a couple of ideas which may work in you
[Guest]: know talking more about my book without just being it like a salesy kind of a
[Guest]: pitch yeah regarding that Covid series that you were talking about I just I
[Guest]: wanted it to be a Twitter thread at first but then I said that like posting
[Guest]: it as it was was more than 13 or 14 tweets and you know Instagram gives you
[Guest]: only 10 options to swipe through so if I took a screenshot of every tweet and it
[Guest]: would not fit into that whole 10 picture carousel so then I said okay let me
[Guest]: write things in one like keep it a shorter kind of a slideshow and that is
[Guest]: purely because of the kind of availability of space and the way it works and you
[Guest]: know I was absolutely clear I don't want to talk about my book or market anything
[Guest]: in this scheme because this is purely because I want to help people who are
[Guest]: wondering what do we eat in these times and I didn't want it to be anything
[Guest]: about my book or my blog or no links nothing so it was purely something which
[Guest]: I thought I want to follow this and I think it's good for people who are
[Guest]: conscious and who are worried about what to eat in these times maybe it will give
[Guest]: some kind of guidelines and format on how to plan their food that said I think
[Guest]: the platform that I truly enjoy is Twitter and although people keep saying
[Guest]: now toxic place and this and that but I think I've curated my crowd fairly well
[Guest]: and I either follow people who make me laugh or I get something to learn from
[Guest]: that you know or appears in my field where I know what they are doing and I
[Guest]: can get some inspiration from them so these are the only reasons for which I
[Guest]: follow people on Twitter so I use it in this way and it works for me and you
[Guest]: know even for my first book I've written a few articles and given a few talks on
[Guest]: you know how to use Twitter what do you get out of Twitter so when I check my
[Guest]: blog stats it is the platform that I spend the least time on which is
[Guest]: Pinterest that gives me maximum views to my blog and Twitter where I spend the
[Guest]: most time on gives me the least number of views but everything is not tangible
[Guest]: and it gives me a lot of visibility and things like my first book it just got a
[Guest]: lot of a lot of journalists knew about this book it got written about and all
[Guest]: that counts for a lot and people recognize you in this space and then you
[Guest]: build a circle of friends you know with whom you can have a banter or you meet
[Guest]: when they are in your city because you know when you're in your 30s and 40s it's
[Guest]: just so difficult to make friends and maybe sometimes if you have a kid you
[Guest]: befriend their parents and that kind of thing but on your own how are you going
[Guest]: to even find like-minded people without being creepy and say hey let's be
[Guest]: friends you know that happens only on Twitter because it just you just
[Guest]: gravitate towards like-minded people so easily somehow I think that's the good
[Guest]: thing about the algorithm of that platform that it just brings you
[Guest]: together and whatever the reasons I love being on that platform connecting with
[Guest]: people and also learning so much about a diverse range of things which I would
[Guest]: not have been exposed to otherwise because I'm not going to pick up a book
[Guest]: on say policy or economics because that's not some that's not my subject
[Guest]: and I think I may not understand that but when you read about it on Twitter
[Guest]: you at least get an inkling of what's happening you're not a complete dumbo
[Guest]: in the other subjects you know a little bit about everything I think that's very
[Guest]: important you know in general to know about things and Twitter really feeds
[Guest]: that curiosity in me so it is my favorite platform you know I kind of
[Amit Varma]: mirror that it's a platform I'm most active on and parts of it are very toxic
[Amit Varma]: but you you just need to curate your field and decide on the kind of
[Amit Varma]: interactions you need to have I mean my one of my thumb rules I block a lot and
[Amit Varma]: one of my thumb rules is earlier it was trolling then it was rudeness now it is
[Amit Varma]: simply if someone says something to me on Twitter which they would not say to
[Amit Varma]: me in one person I block them because those are not the kind of conversations
[Guest]: absolutely I do the same and on Instagram recently when I said that
[Guest]: everybody must go out and take their vaccines I was told that I'm being a
[Guest]: bully on the internet for forcing people to get vaccinated because people may
[Guest]: have their own reservations against the vaccine and like this was the first
[Guest]: thing I read when I opened my phone in the morning and I said serves you right
[Guest]: for opening a phone like first thing in the morning and checking Instagram
[Guest]: comments from strangers and I instantly blocked this often because it's like
[Guest]: this my social media is my home why will I let someone come into my home abuse me
[Guest]: for no reason and then still want to continue reading my content and being a
[Guest]: part of my circle so if I wouldn't want that person in my home I wouldn't want
[Guest]: that person reading or understanding all that useful content that I keep
[Guest]: posting for free so they have no business reading that so I I just block
[Guest]: and earlier I would feel bad and you know sometimes friends say you're giving
[Guest]: them too much you know space in your head they will think you're giving them
[Guest]: too much importance I said I don't care if that hurts me I'm blocking them so I
[Guest]: think that really works well for me and there's no why should I force you know
[Guest]: unpleasant things into my head it's not like I'm not that kind of a person
[Amit Varma]: exactly no I block liberally and and sometimes some random bhakt will say but
[Amit Varma]: how can you say you're for free speech if you're blocking and the point there
[Amit Varma]: is that has nothing to do with free speech you're free to speak wherever you
[Amit Varma]: are but you're not entitled to my attention and it is exactly if you're
[Amit Varma]: caught if I'm allowing you on my timeline it is exactly like you said
[Amit Varma]: that I'm allowing you into my home and if I don't want you in my home I'm
[Amit Varma]: entitled to kick you out and you can say whatever you want outside or on your own
[Amit Varma]: platform or whatever so I think we should all be kind to ourselves and be
[Amit Varma]: careful of who we let into our mind space so to say so I try to curate that
[Amit Varma]: carefully now I'll link to this excellent thread of yours on what to eat
[Amit Varma]: in these covid times in the show notes so I meant to ask you about that but
[Amit Varma]: because we're running out of time I'll do the Karan Johar thing right I have
[Amit Varma]: never done a Karan Johar kind of rapid-fire so you know I'm afraid you
[Amit Varma]: don't get a hamper at the end of it and if I if I did have a hamper to give you
[Amit Varma]: I would have to ask you to curate it because who better but here's a rapid
[Amit Varma]: fire anyway and it's only four little questions and the first of them is a
[Amit Varma]: thought experiment that look why do we eat we eat to live right in a sense we
[Amit Varma]: need certain nutrients to keep our body going so if in an you know imagined
[Amit Varma]: future and I think they have been thought experiments like this before
[Amit Varma]: somebody could just give you a pill in the morning and that satiates you that
[Amit Varma]: takes care of all your nutritional needs you don't your body doesn't need to eat
[Amit Varma]: anything after that during the day and if you want pleasurable sensation of
[Amit Varma]: taste then you have things like a bacon pill you eat that and for 15 minutes you
[Amit Varma]: feel the taste of bacon in your mouth or whatever the case might be it's a thought
[Amit Varma]: experiment right we can get away with this shit so would that kind of world
[Amit Varma]: seem utopian or dystopian to you does it seem absolutely wonderful absolutely
[Guest]: horrible at present I welcome that thought because I'm kind of fed up of
[Guest]: cooking every day so I would just devote my time into all other fun things that
[Guest]: like music and other things that I enjoy and not be at the you know in the
[Guest]: kitchen the whole day so utopian right now wonderful and the interesting thing
[Amit Varma]: is you know you pointed out that in 98 in your book you pointed out that in 98
[Amit Varma]: percent of Indian households a primary cook is a woman so I think men and women
[Amit Varma]: might just answer this question differently where the men will say
[Amit Varma]: nahi yaar wo swaad chahiye parathe ka and the woman will be like bivi ke haath ka khaana
[Amit Varma]: nahi to maa ke haath ka khaana and the woman will be like I'm not making no more parathas okay
[Amit Varma]: next question what is what according to you is a criminally underrated item of
[Guest]: food you can give multiple items I think I would say daal because in Indian
[Guest]: cuisine we just end up making like a daal to go with rice but it is very
[Guest]: versatile and we don't explore the so many different things that you can end
[Guest]: up making with that and we treat it like very careless roz ka kind of stuff but
[Amit Varma]: there's a huge potential to play around with that ingredient yeah so even that
[Amit Varma]: phrase ghar ki murgi daal barabar should therefore be changed it should be ghar ki
[Amit Varma]: daal murgi barabar is basically what you're saying okay next question most
[Amit Varma]: overrated food biryani oh god this feels like a personal assault on me but I'll
[Guest]: forgive you this for that I would have said bacon but I didn't say I didn't I
[Amit Varma]: didn't want to be so personal but by now saying that I am NOT saying bacon you
[Amit Varma]: have said bacon also well done bacon bhi gaya biryani bhi gaya okay well what can we do
[Amit Varma]: okay and and final question as the show ends why not end on a nice note that at
[Amit Varma]: some point in time we are going to reach a phase where people can go out and eat
[Amit Varma]: again and restaurants are open again and there are joys to dining out especially
[Amit Varma]: with friends and loved ones so what are your favorite restaurants in the two
[Amit Varma]: cities I know a little bit of in the ones that you've lived in which are
[Amit Varma]: Mumbai and Bangalore what are your favorite restaurants which you feel
[Guest]: people must try so I'll talk about Bombay I love this place called Sika or
[Guest]: Seiko in is it in I think I'm Lamel's compound it's Mexican cuisine and it's
[Guest]: fairly authentic it's not like substituting rajma in every dish so they
[Guest]: even have you know corn mold I forget it's got a very complex sounding
[Guest]: Mexican name for it so it's the mold that grows on corn and that's like a
[Guest]: delicacy and very expensive so they use ingredients like those to create like
[Guest]: the authentic Mexican flavors so I'll go with that one and in Bangalore I mean I
[Guest]: would day any day vote for the dosa because I try as I might I can't get
[Guest]: the similar kind of dosa experience here so anything like a CTR or that kind of
[Guest]: one of those traditional dosa places I am dying to go there but these they are
[Guest]: always so crowded I haven't stepped out in over a year thank you so much I mean
[Amit Varma]: this conversation at least for me was like a feast and thank you so much for
[Guest]: your time and indeed your patience thank you Amit it was lovely chatting with you
[Guest]: and you know enjoying your podcasts for such a long time and I'm happy that I
[Amit Varma]: got to be a part of this if you enjoyed listening to this episode head on over
[Amit Varma]: to your nearest online bookstore and pick up everyday superfoods by Nandita
[Amit Varma]: Iyer other relevant links are in the show notes you can follow her on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at saffron trail and you can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma AMI TV ARMA you
[Amit Varma]: can browse past episodes of the scene in the unseen at seen unseen dot I n and
[Amit Varma]: hey while you are doing so while you are binge listening to the show which you
[Amit Varma]: certainly should don't also binge eat some nonsense pay attention
[Amit Varma]: did you enjoy this episode of the scene in the unseen if so would you like to
[Amit Varma]: support the production of the show you can go over to seen unseen dot I n slash
[Amit Varma]: support and contribute any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and
[Amit Varma]: kicking thank you